https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-48090304
India student leader 'a symbol of protest' against PM Modi - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India student leader 'a symbol of protest' against PM Modi 30 April 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-48090304 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics India elections 2019 Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Mr Kumar is a candidate for the Communist Party of India A district in one of India's poorest states has made national headlines in the ongoing general election after a firebrand student leader decided to run for a seat there. Kanhaiya Kumar, who was charged with "sedition" for allegedly shouting anti-India slogans and spent a few weeks in jail in 2016, is a candidate from Begusarai constituency where voting was held on Monday. Neha Thirani Bagri reports. It is early morning in the Bihari village of Bihat, when Kanhaiya Kumar emerges from his home. He is immediately swamped by young men rushing to shake his hand, asking to take selfies with him, wearing t-shirts emblazoned with his image. Mr Kumar, who grew up here, shot to fame in 2016 when he was arrested and charged with sedition. Then a student union leader at Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University, he was accused of chanting anti-India slogans at a campus event to commemorate the anniversary of the hanging of Mohammed Afzal Guru, a Kashmiri man convicted of plotting the 2001 attacks on the Indian parliament. Kanhaiya Kumar: India's most loved and loathed student His arrest became the rallying cry for critics of the Hindu nationalist politics of India's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), with student protests organised across the country. Mr Kumar is still fighting the charge of sedition, a colonial-era statute that has been used to clamp down on dissent in India, which he calls "completely false propaganda." "Kanhaiya Kumar has become a symbol of protest against the politics which is represented by Prime Minister Narendra Modi," said Sanjay Kumar, director of the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies. Mr Kumar has since completed his PhD. On Monday, he had his first foray into politics, when he ran for election in the constituency of Begusarai in the fourth phase of polling in the Indian election. Votes will only be counted in late May. The constituency was once a communist stronghold known as the "Leningrad of Bihar." "This was not a choice, to enter politics. It was a forced responsibility," Mr Kumar said during a full day of campaigning before his constituency went to the polls. Mr Kumar is from the Communist Party of India (CPI), the influence of which has been waning over the past few years. India votes 2019 Rahul Gandhi: Can India's Congress leader unseat PM Modi? Narendra Modi: The man who wants 900m votes Meeting a 'foot soldier' of the Hindu far-right "Our constitution talks about a secular country. If they are attempting to invoke a particular religion and change the character of the state, then, of course, we will oppose this." While Mr Modi swept to a historic victory in India's last election in 2014 on the promise of better days ahead, many rural Indians have been disappointed with rising unemployment and an agrarian crisis. Mr Modi and other BJP leaders have been criticised for spouting communally-charged rhetoric and remaining silent in the face of increasing religious violence. Kanhaiya Kumar: 'Sedition' student returns to JNU with fiery speech The main opposition Congress party has struggled to mount a strong challenge, though gained some momentum with victories in key state elections last year. Bihar, India's third most populous state, elects 40 members out of 545 to India's lower house of parliament. In the 2014 general election, the BJP won 22 of the 40 seats. On Monday, Mr Kumar went up against BJP's Giriraj Singh, who once said that those who oppose Mr Modi should go to Pakistan. It was a three-way contest with the regional Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD), which has fielded a Muslim candidate. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionKanhaiya Kumar talks about his politics "Right now, people's real issues have vanished from the conversation," said Mr Kumar. He has become known for often emphasising education, jobs, public healthcare, and minority rights in his speeches. Mr Kumar has garnered the support of civil rights campaigners, activists, and celebrities from across India. His outsized social media presence has also made him particularly popular with young people, many of whom are drawn towards Mr Kumar's charismatic personality, fiery oratory, and local roots. 'Connect with the young' Videos of his speeches, often critical of the BJP and right-wing politics, have garnered millions of views on YouTube and Facebook. "Kanhaiya's thinking connects with us young people," said Pankaj Kumar, 24, adding that he often shares the politician's speeches with his friends on WhatsApp. "If Kanhaiya wins at least we will have pride - it was because of him that Begusarai became famous in India and even the whole world." Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Mr Kumar's fiery speeches have drawn in voters Mr Kumar's speeches have also attracted a sizeable number of Muslim voters - many in the district were vocal supporters of him. "People with power in this country are only thinking about how to create religious division," said Mohammed Shoaib Alam. "Kanhaiya will raise his voice for the issues of poor people," he added. While Mr Kumar's popularity has drawn national attention to the contest for the parliamentary seat from this remote constituency, his victory is far from certain. "All odds are against him," said Neelanjan Sircar, a senior fellow at the Centre for Policy Research, adding that Mr Kumar did not benefit from having the backing of a large political party or coalition or the consolidated vote from one community. "If he pulls this off - and he is massively popular on the ground - it would just be a testament to his individual political skill." Neha Thirani Bagri is an independent journalist Related Topics Narendra Modi India Asia India elections 2019 Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Kanhaiya Kumar: India's most loved and loathed student 11 March 2016 Why India needs to get rid of its sedition law 29 August 2016 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.