https://www.bbc.com/news/36911614
India cow vigilantes held for beating up Muslim women over beef - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India cow vigilantes held for beating up Muslim women over beef 28 July 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/36911614 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Suhail Niyazi Image caption A video of the two women being beaten has gone viral in India Four cow protection vigilantes have been arrested for beating up two Muslim women accused of carrying beef in the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh. The two women were also arrested on suspicion of selling cow meat, which is banned in the state - although a preliminary test found the meat they were carrying came from a buffalo. All six people arrested in the case have now been released on bail. A video showing the group beating up the women has gone viral in India. Many Hindus consider cows sacred and the slaughter of the animal is banned in several states. The ruling Bharatiya Janata Party government has come under increasing pressure from Hindu hardliners to do more to protect cows. The state's home minister, Bhupendra Singh, said that the men would be punished, but said action would also be taken against anybody found to be smuggling beef. There have been several other attacks on men and women across India, who have been accused of eating or smuggling beef. A recent video of four Dalit men, believed to be tannery workers, being stripped and beaten with sticks for skinning a dead cow in western Gujarat state's Una town went viral and has sparked massive protests by Dalit groups in several states. Last year, a Muslim man, Mohammed Akhlaq, was lynched by a mob that attacked his house over allegations that his family had been storing and consuming beef. Related Topics India Hinduism Asia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story India protests continue after cow protectors assault Dalits in Gujarat 20 July 2016 India Muslim couple attacked over rumours of carrying beef 15 January 2016 A night patrol with India's cow protection vigilantes 29 October 2015 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.