https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-us-canada-32981497/could-fadumo-dayib-be-somalia-s-first-female-president
Could Fadumo Dayib be Somalia's first female president? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US & Canada selected Video duration 3:21 Somalia's female presidential candidate Jump to media player Fadumo Dayib wants to be Somalia's first female president. And the former refugee says nothing will stop her from running. 03 Jun 15 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-us-canada-32981497/could-fadumo-dayib-be-somalia-s-first-female-president Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:58 Is the tide turning against al-Shabab? Jump to media player It is nearly four years since the militant group al-Shabab was driven out of the Somali capital, Mogadishu and it has lost much of the territory it once controlled. 25 May 15 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-africa-32879633/is-the-tide-turning-against-al-shabab-in-somalia Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 1:31 Rehabilitating al-Shabab fighters Jump to media player In a small, heavily guarded compound on the outskirts of Baidoa in Somalia, a new programme is trying to help former al-Shabab fighters reintegrate into society. 24 May 15 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-africa-32800183/rehabilitating-somalia-s-former-al-shabab-fighters Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:51 Peace and progress at Somalia beach Jump to media player After decades of civil war and famine, Somalia is showing some signs of a return to normal life. 22 May 15 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-africa-32840068/somalia-showing-signs-of-peace-and-progress Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Could Fadumo Dayib be Somalia's first female president? Fadumo Dayib wants to be Somalia's first female president. The mother of four says she has already received death threats, but that nothing will stop her from running in the upcoming elections, which are due to be held in 2016. Fadumo was born in Kenya, the daughter of Somali parents. As a child, her family was deported back to Somalia, but when civil war broke out shortly thereafter they were forced to leave again, ending up in Finland. She didn't learn to read and write until the age of 14, but went on to earn masters degrees in health care and public health. It was through her work with the United Nations that she realized she wanted to do more to help the people of Somalia. The BBC met Fadumo in Boston, where she recently graduated from the Harvard Kennedy School of Government. Produced by Ashley Semler; Filmed by Colm O'Molloy; Edited by Bill McKenna 03 Jun 2015 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-us-canada-32981497/could-fadumo-dayib-be-somalia-s-first-female-president Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: Is the tide turning against al-Shabab? More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US & Canada Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.