https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-41332272
What ails the Indian economy? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India Asia Asia What ails the Indian economy? 26 September 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-41332272 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Getty Images Image caption India's once robust economy is slowing India's economy grew at its slowest pace for three years in the April-to-June quarter and growth has declined for six quarters in a row. Economic analyst Vivek Kaul explains why one of the world's fastest growing economies is sputtering to a halt. On Monday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi revived India's economic council, a body that he had abolished soon after coming into power in 2014. India has just seen its slowest economic growth since Mr Modi took over as the prime minister on the back of promises over more jobs and a stronger economy. For the period between April and June 2017, Indian GDP grew by just 5.7% (as against 9.1% a year earlier). Much of that 5.7% was because the government spent more than it usually does. The non-government part of the GDP, which forms roughly 90% of the economy, grew by a meagre 4.3%. Industry as a whole grew by 1.6%, with manufacturing and construction growing by 1.2% and 2% respectively. The last time the economy grew by less than 6% (at 5.3%) was between January and March 2014, when Manmohan Singh was the prime minister. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Narendra Modi took over as the prime minister in May 2014 We live in a world where any rate of growth greater than 2% is considered to be good. But what is true for Western countries isn't necessarily true for India. India's GDP needs to grow at a rate faster than 7% for the country to continue to pull millions out of poverty. "Even a small change in the growth rate of per capita income makes a big difference to eventual income per head," writes economist Vijay Joshi in India's Long Road - The Search for Prosperity. This is what economists call the "power of compound interest". Why inequality in India is at its highest level in 92 years Why India's GST is one of the world's most complex tax reforms And how would things look for India by 2040 at different rates of economic growth? According to Joshi: "At a growth rate of 3% a year, income per head would double, and reach about the same level as China's per capita income today. At a growth rate of 6% a year, income per head would quadruple to a level around that enjoyed by Chile, Malaysia and Poland today. "If income per head grew at 9% a year, it would increase nearly eight-fold, and India would have a per capita income comparable to an average high-income country of today." Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Agriculture still employs half of India's workforce Agriculture, which accounts for around 15% of GDP, continues to employ half the country's workforce. But exports between April and August 2017 are lower than they were in 2013 and 2014. There is also India's so called demographic dividend - 12 million young Indians are entering the workforce every year. But given the lack of a good education, most of these young people need low-skilled jobs, which the construction and real estate industries can provide. With both sectors growing at the rate they are, where will the jobs come from? The services sector continues to grow robustly, but it still needs support from industries like construction. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Millions of unskilled young people enter India's workforce each year Even those industries that have the potential to create many jobs, such as apparel manufacturing, continue to operate on a small scale because of India's convoluted labour laws. A recent report, Ease of Doing Business - An Enterprise Survey of Indian States, published by a federal institute, found that 85% of the firms operating in the apparel sector employed less than eight workers. In fact, 85% of Indian manufacturing firms employ less than 50 workers. The government feels that it has done enough to reform labour laws, and it is now the industry's responsibility to set up labour-intensive enterprises. But as the data suggests, Indian industry continues to favour capital-intensive, rather than labour-intensive, methods of expansion. As a result of all these factors, India has huge underemployment. Numbers from 2015-2016 suggest that only three out of five people looking for a job throughout the year are able to find one. The situation is worse in rural India, where only one in two are successful. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption After 86% of currency was cancelled overnight, Indians flooded banks to exchange the old notes for new ones Demonetisation (a surprise government decision to cancel 86% of India's currency) has also made things worse - many firms operating in the cash-only informal sector, which created so many jobs, had to shut down. And the Goods and Services Tax, a major overhaul that replaced numerous federal and state taxes with a single tax rate, hasn't helped either. The other big worry is that India's largely government-owned public sector banks are in a mess. Seventeen of 21 banks have a bad loans rate of 10% or more (as of 31 March). Bad loans are loans in which the repayment from a borrower has been due for 90 days or more. One bank (the Indian Overseas Bank) has a bad loans rate of 25%. These bad loans are largely the result of lending to industry, where the overall bad loans rate stands at 22.3%. Why India wiped out 86% of its cash overnight Why aren't Indians angrier over note ban failure? Image copyright Getty Images Image caption India's central bank is grappling with a crisis of bad loans The government has already pumped in close to 1,500bn rupees ($23bn; £17bn) as capital since 2009 to keep these banks going. But with the banks continuing to accumulate bad loans, they are going to need billions more as capital to continue to operate. The federal government does not have this money but it remains reluctant to privatise or even shut down some of these banks. A major impact of bad loans has been that public sector banks are now reluctant to lend to industry. The Indian economy is suffering from many structural issues and if a long-term growth rate of 7-8% per year has to be sustained, these issues need to be tackled on a war footing. Related Topics Unemployment India Asia Economics Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.