https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46094228
Delhi panic over toxic air ahead of Indian festival Diwali - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Delhi panic over toxic air ahead of Indian festival Diwali 5 November 2018 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46094228 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Getty Images Image caption A thick blanket of smog eclipsed Delhi on Monday Panic gripped the Indian capital Delhi on Monday as residents woke up to a blanket of thick grey smog ahead of Diwali, the festival of lights. Visibility is poor as pollution levels reached 20 times the World Health Organisation's recommended limit. The air quality is expected to worsen in the coming days due to the use of firecrackers, experts have warned. Indian cities regularly dominate global pollution rankings for the worst air quality. The Supreme Court has restricted the timeframe for setting off firecrackers to only two hours during the day - but experts believe this curfew will be hard to implement. Diwali, the most important Hindu festival in north India, celebrates the victory of good over evil. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionA hair-raising drive through the Delhi smog in 2017 However in the last few years, celebrations have seen air pollution rise to hazardous levels after many firecrackers were set off. Many have taken to social media to share their concerns as well as post dramatic photos of the city to show the extent of the problem. On Sunday, the pollution level in the city dipped and was categorised as "poor". But a sharp spike in smog on Monday morning - which recorded a reading of 365 on the Air Quality Index (AQI) - has effectively put the city's air in the "hazardous" category. Authorities in Delhi have warned residents to stay indoors as much as possible and have started to shut down construction activity in the city. India Delhi residents choke as dust blankets capital How a food crisis led to Delhi’s foul smog Can Delhi ever clean up its foul air? The Indian capital is the sixth worst place in the world for pollution, according to World Health Organisation (WHO) data. Air quality in the city worsens every year in November and December as farmers in the neighbouring states of Punjab and Haryana burn crop stubble to clear their fields. The Graded Response Action Plan (GRAP), an emergency government initiative to try and improve conditions, has also launched around Delhi. It bans activities like rubbish burning to try and improve air quality. Related Topics Air pollution India Pollution Delhi New Delhi Asia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Delhi smog: Foul air came from India's farming revolution 23 October 2018 Bryan Adams concert photograph shows off Delhi pollution 15 October 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.