https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47499917
India election 2019: Bringing power to the people - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: Bringing power to the people By Shadab Nazmi BBC Reality Check 26 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47499917 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Reality Check Image copyright AFP The Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, said last year that his government had reached its target of providing every village in India with electricity. "Yesterday, we fulfilled a commitment due to which the lives of several Indians will be changed forever," Mr Modi tweeted in April 2018. In the run-up to the Indian election, which gets under way on 11 April, BBC Reality Check examines claims and pledges made by the main political parties. So does this claim stand up to scrutiny? Image Copyright @narendramodi @narendramodi Report Image Copyright @narendramodi @narendramodi Report Let's start by looking at villages. There are almost 600,000 villages in India, according to the 2011 census. The government defines a village as fully electrified if 10% of its households, as well as public places such as schools and health centres, are connected to the grid. By this definition, all villages have now been electrified, according to official data. However, much of the work had been done under the previous governments. When Mr Modi took office, 96% of all the villages in India were already electrified. That left about 18,000 villages to go. Has the BJP kept its pledge on prices? Are India's farmers getting what they were promised? Before the BJP came to power, India had the world's largest electricity access deficit - 270 million people. That accounted for just under a third of the overall global deficit, according to the World Bank's 2017 State of Electricity Access report. The World Bank estimates that nearly 85% of the entire population now has access to power supply - that's slightly higher than the government estimate of 82%. Number of villages electrified Source: Central Electricity Authority What about households? The project Mr Modi launched in September 2017 aimed to provide electricity to all Indian households by December 2018, covering 40 million families, primarily targeting rural India. India launches $2.5bn electricity scheme India says all villages have electricity Virtually all Indian households have now been electrified, according to the government's data. As of March, just 19,753 households are left. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The quality of the electricity supply is weaker in the northern and eastern states. The current government has suggested it has been electrifying villages at a faster rate than the previous one. However, using central electricity authority data, we found that under the previous Congress-led government, an average of more than 9,000 villages a year were being electrified compared with the Modi government's average of more than 4,000 villages a year. Problems with supply Although substantial progress has been made to electrify Indian villages - both by the current and previous administrations - the quality of the supply remains a problem, especially in rural areas. Only six out of 29 states receive a 24-hour power supply, according to a government response to a question in India's parliament. Just under half of villages have more than 12 hours of domestic electricity a day and a third receive between eight and 12 hours, according to government data. States with the highest percentage of villages that receive between just one and four hours of electricity a day include Jharkhand, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on Twitter Related Topics Reality Check India India elections 2019 Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story India's $2.5bn scheme to electrify every household 26 September 2017 India says all villages have electricity 30 April 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.