https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-33253411
How rich is the Queen? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK selected Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say UK selected England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 UK UK How rich is the Queen? By Alex Therrien BBC News Online 25 June 2015 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-33253411 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright EPA News that the Crown Estate returned record profits of £285m last year means the Queen is expected to receive a further £2m in public funding next year. But just how rich is the Queen and where does her wealth come from? Despite the fact that many details of the Queen's income are released publicly, her exact wealth is not known. That is because the Queen is not required to reveal her private finances. According to the Sunday Times Rich List 2015, her estimated fortune is £340m, up £10m from last year. What is known about the Queen's wealth can be broadly divided between her private income and funding given to her, as the reigning monarch, by the government. The Crown Estate Image copyright ALLSPORT/Getty Images Image caption The Crown Estate owns Ascot racecourse The main source of the Queen's public income comes from the Sovereign Grant - a fixed percentage of the profits made by the Crown Estate. The Crown Estate dates back to 1760 when George III reached an agreement with the government that surplus revenue from the crown's lands would go to the Treasury. In return for this, the King had no longer to pay for the cost of civil government and debts accrued by previous monarchs and would receive a fixed annual payment. Since then, every succeeding monarch has renewed the arrangement. Image caption The Crown Estate owns the majority of the freehold buildings in London's Regent Street Today the Crown Estate is an independent commercial property business, with one of the largest property portfolios in the UK and a capital value at a historic high of £11.5bn - up 16.1% on 2014. The majority of the portfolio's assets are in London, but the estate also owns property in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Holdings include Windsor Great Park and Ascot racecourse, but the majority of the portfolio is made up of residential property, commercial offices, shops and business and retail parks, and includes almost all of Regent Street in London's West End. Under the current funding arrangement, all profits from the estate are paid to the Treasury and 15% of this money is then given to the Queen. This funding is known as the Sovereign Grant and is used to support the Queen in her official duties. Last year the Sovereign Grant was £37.9m - of which the Queen spent £35.7m. That money pays for staffing costs, property maintenance, travel, utilities and housekeeping, among other things. Technically the Crown Estate belongs to the reigning monarch for the duration of their reign, but in practice it cannot be sold by them. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The Queen's personal property includes Balmoral Castle Privy purse The privy purse is a private income for the Queen, which is primarily used to pay for expenses incurred by other members of the Royal Family. Funds for the privy purse come mostly from the Duchy of Lancaster, a portfolio of land, property and assets owned by the Queen which is managed separately from the Crown Estate. The portfolio consists of 18,454 hectares of land in England and Wales and comprises commercial, agricultural and residential property. Though it is classed as the Queen's private estate and is inherited, it cannot be sold by her. Like the Crown Estate, the profits from the Duchy of Lancaster go to the Treasury, which then give funds to the Queen to provide for expenses not covered by the Sovereign Grant. This year the Queen's private income was £13.3m, of which the main contributor was the Duchy of Lancaster portfolio. There is even a government role, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, whose duties include the administration of the estates and rents of the Duchy of Lancaster. That post is currently filled by Oliver Letwin, the MP for West Dorset who also has overall responsibility for the Cabinet Office. Separately, income from the Duchy of Cornwall funds the private and official expenditure of The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall. Both have been made exempt from paying corporation tax by the government because they are Crown bodies. The Queen's investments Image copyright PA Image caption The Royal Collection includes Charles I, King of England, from Three Angles, 1636 by Sir Anthony van Dyck The extent of the Queen's private income is less well known. According to the Sunday Times, she has an investment portfolio consisting largely of shares in blue-chip British companies, which it valued at £110m. The Queen also owns personal property including Sandringham House in Norfolk, Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire and other smaller houses. Other personal goods include the royal stamp collection, art, jewels, cars, horses and the Queen Mother's legacy, which all add to her personal fortune. Separate to goods owned by the Queen is the Royal Collection, which includes the Crown Jewels and works of art. It contains more than a million objects and is worth £10bn, but it is not included in the Queen's wealth because it is held in trust for her successors and the country. It includes old master prints, historical photographs, furniture, books and other works of art. It is kept in a number of locations, including Hampton Court Palace and Windsor Castle. Related Topics UK Royal Family Queen Elizabeth II Monarchy Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Queen 'could move out of Buckingham Palace' 24 June 2015 Related Internet links The Crown Estate The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation UK Sections England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK selected UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.