https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-wales-45409284
Egyptian academic visa rejection 'damaging' to the UK - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK selected Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Wales selected Wales Politics Wales Business North West North East Mid South West South East Cymru Wales Wales Egyptian academic visa rejection 'damaging' to the UK 4 September 2018 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-wales-45409284 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Patrick CHAPUIS Image caption Gehad Ali was due to present a paper at the Swansea University Egyptology conference An academic's visa rejection is "damaging" to the UK's reputation, organisers of an international Egyptology conference have said. Gehad Ali, curator at the Egyptian Museum in Cairo, was due to present a paper at Swansea University this week. Organisers say Ms Ali's visa was rejected because she didn't have enough money to support herself during her visit. The Home Office said applicants needed to show they met immigration rules. Swansea University said Ms Ali's visa rejection was "disappointing". Initially, two other Egyptology experts had been refused visas alongside Ms Ali, however the pair have since been granted them after reapplying. The international conference, called Beating Barriers, began on Tuesday. 'Really shocking' Gabriele Pieke, president of the Comité Internationale pour L-Egyptologie (CIPEG) said she could not understand the decision to reject Ms Ali's visa application as her trip to the conference was fully funded by CIPEG. Ms Pieke's organisation and its governing body - the International Council of Museums - have condemned the decision not to grant Ms Ali a visa. "This jeopardises what we stand for, an international exchange of ideas," Ms Pieke said. "To not let a respected academic come her because she's too poor? It's really shocking." Visa row archaeologist faces deportation Anger over Gaelic teacher's visa refusal Academics' deportation order overturned The International Council of Museums also said it was concerned other international events might be affected by visa restrictions in the future. "This policy will not only deter international organisations from holding their conferences and meetings in the United Kingdom if members from Africa, Asia or Latin America cannot participate; it will also hinder the development of the scientific and professional community in the UK," the organisation said. Elham Salah, head of the museum sector in Egypt's Ministry of Antiquity, said Ms Ali will now have to make her presentation via a video conference. "She is very sad and it's not the first time academics from Egypt have faced visa problems," Ms Salah said. The Swansea West MP Geraint Davies called the UK Immigration policy "disgraceful" and said it would "isolate UK academia from the world." The Home Office said the onus was on the applicant to demonstrate that they satisfied the immigration rules. "All UK visa applications are considered on their individual merits and in line with UK immigration rules and guidance," a spokesperson said. "In addition to any support provided by a sponsor, decision makers will take account of an applicant's own personal and financial circumstances in assessing whether the application meets the requirements of the immigration rules." Related Topics Swansea Egypt Swansea University Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story UK 'missing out' on overseas students 4 September 2018 NHS groups welcome immigration change for doctors and nurses 14 June 2018 What is the Einstein visa? And how did Melania Trump get one? 2 March 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Wales Sections Wales Wales Politics Wales Business North West North East Mid South West South East Cymru Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK selected UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales selected Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.