https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-34599849
India beef lynching premeditated, says inquiry - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India beef lynching premeditated, says inquiry 22 October 2015 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-34599849 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Hindustan Times Image caption Mohammad Akhlaq was beaten to death over accusations the goat meat in his fridge was beef A commission of inquiry in India has concluded that the lynching of a man over rumours he kept and consumed beef was premeditated and not spontaneous. A panel from the National Commission for Minorities visited the village of Bisada, near Delhi, where Mohammad Akhlaq, a Muslim, was beaten to death. It said a Hindu temple had been used to plan the attack. Government ministers from the Hindu nationalist BJP have said the incident was a spontaneous expression of anger. In recent weeks three Muslim men have been killed by Hindus accusing them of eating or smuggling beef. Mr Akhlaq's killing sparked furious debate about religious tolerance, with some criticising Prime Minister Narendra Modi for not condemning the attack sooner. Two weeks later he called it "sad and undesirable". Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionWhat’s India’s beef with beef? (VIDEO FROM 2015) Mr Akhlaq, a farm worker in the state of Uttar Pradesh, was asleep next to his son last month when a mob burst in wielding sticks, swords and pistols. The villagers accused the nine-member family of having slaughtered and consumed a cow. Mr Akhlaq and his son were beaten with bricks, kicked and stabbed repeatedly. Hindus consider cows to be sacred, and for many, eating beef is taboo. Some meat found in the fridge was held to be proof that beef had been eaten. Later, tests confirmed it was goat meat. Image caption The report found an announcement from the village temple helped large numbers amass The team of investigators concluded in its report that the mob violence against Mr Akhlaq and his family had been planned and a Hindu temple was used "to exhort people of one community to attack a hapless family". Mr Khan said an announcement by the temple that beef had been found provoked the assault. The ability of so many people to amass within minutes "at a time when most villagers claimed they were asleep, seems to point to some premeditated planning," the report said. There is a separate, ongoing police investigation into the case. Muslims are the largest minority making up 13% of the country's 1.2bn people. Image copyright AP Image caption Mohammad Akhlaq's mother Asgari Begum was beaten in the attack Related Topics India Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Head of India's BJP 'rebukes politicians' in beef row 18 October 2015 'Beef' lynching: Failure of India's political imagination? 5 October 2015 Why India man was lynched over beef rumours 1 October 2015 The Indians who have a beef with the ban on beef 3 March 2015 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.