https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49329370
Kashmir move spells trouble for other Indian states - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Kashmir move spells trouble for other Indian states Soutik Biswas India correspondent 18 August 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49329370 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Reuters Image caption Delhi's move has upset India's delicate federal balance Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has always fashioned himself as an advocate of federalism - someone who believes in giving the country's states more independence. But last week's revocation of special status to Jammu and Kashmir - as the Indian state was known - and the move to split it into two union territories while imposing an unprecedented lockdown there is being seen by many as a major weakening of India's federal structure. The new union territories (Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh) will be ruled directly from Delhi. Union territories have far less autonomy from the federal government than states. Sumantra Bose, a professor of international and comparative politics at the London School of Economics, calls them "glorified municipalities of Delhi". Viewpoint: Why Modi's Kashmir move is widely supported in India Inside Kashmir's lockdown: 'Even I will pick up a gun' What happened with Kashmir and why it matters By revoking the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, ostensibly to put it on the same footing as the rest of India, Mr Modi's government, in the words of one commentator, has "upset India's delicate federal balance". In many ways, Article 370 - as the constitutional article guaranteeing special status is known - was more symbolic, as presidential decrees over the years had already eroded much of the autonomy it guaranteed. What was more important, many say, was the spirit of the status: it signalled that the Indian constitution was malleable enough to make space for people who felt alienated or estranged from the mainstream. Image copyright Reuters Image caption Kashmir has been put under an unprecedented lockdown India's federalism has in fact, been hard-earned and hard-fought. Unlike more economically advanced and culturally homogenous countries with a federal system of government like the US and Canada, consensus over power sharing in a culturally and religiously diverse, poorer country like India has not been easy to forge. Thankfully the Indian constitution has provided a clear division of powers between the elected federal government and the state legislatures. "The constitution strives to strike a delicate balance between the unitary and federal systems," says Yamini Aiyar, chief executive of Delhi-based think tank Centre for Policy Research. Viewpoint: Why Modi's Kashmir move is widely supported Viewpoint: Has India pushed Kashmir to a point of no return? However, there have always been doubts about what some commentators call the "authenticity of Indian federalism". State governors, usually political appointees of the the ruling federal government, have helped clamp direct rule in states where there has been a "failure of constitutional machinery". (An adverse report by the governor on the affairs of the state can become the basis of president's rule, or direct rule from Delhi, and authorise the dismissal of a state government.) Such direct rule has been declared in Indian states 88 times between 1951 and 1997. Image copyright Reuters Image caption Kashmiris themselves were not consulted before Article 370 was revoked Many believe the revocation of special status from Indian-administered Kashmir - without consulting the local people and political leaders and implemented when the state was under direct rule - is another taint on India's federal record. "The single biggest significance of this move is that we are moving towards a unitary state, and abrogation of democratic principles. This is weakening federalism in India. People are so busy celebrating the move that they don't seem to get the big picture," Navnita Chadha Behera, a former visiting scholar at the Brookings Institution and the author of Demystifying Kashmir, told me. "What is more worrying is this can happen to any other state. The federal government can dissolve a state government, ride roughshod over the consultative process, split the state and downgrade its status. Also worrying is the near-complete collapse of resistance to the move with most of the civil society, media and regional parties remaining silent or protesting very feebly." Yamini Aiyar believes "federalism, which the framers of India's constitution saw as necessary to India's democracy, today has far fewer takers than it did in 1947. This is dangerous for India's democracy". Supporters of the move say that strife-ridden Kashmir is a "special case", and a consultative process in an insurgency-hit and militarised region next door to India's nuclear-armed rival, Pakistan, would have led nowhere. Also Mr Modi's Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has for years consistently demanded the revocation of Article 370, calling it an example of "appeasement" in India's only Muslim-majority state. However, India has a history of reconciling separatist aspirations. Where else, many say, could an insurgent leader who fought a guerrilla war for independence for a quarter of a century go on to become an elected state chief minister? But this is exactly what happened when the rebel leader Laldenga signed an accord with the Indian government in the north-eastern state of Mizoram in 1986. Power sharing and inclusivity have only bolstered democracy in India and made the country more resilient. Image copyright Reuters Image caption The ruling BJP said Article 370 was an example of "appeasement" in India's only Muslim-majority state India's Supreme Court, in the past, has clearly said that the "fact that under the scheme of constitution greater power is conferred upon the centre vis-a-vis the state does not mean that states are mere appendages of the centre." "Within the sphere allotted to them, states are supreme. The centre cannot tamper with their powers," the court added. It has also been unequivocal about the status of federalism as a basic constitutional structure. It will be interesting to see how India's Supreme Court deals with the legal challenges against the move on Kashmir. "This will be a test case for the top court's independence," says Dr Behera. Read more from Soutik Biswas Why people are more honest than we think 'There is no water. Why should people stay here?' How Britain tried to 'erase' India's third gender How Narendra Modi has reinvented Indian politics India's next government will have a growth problem How sugar influences the world's biggest vote Related Topics Article 370 of the Constitution of India Kashmir India Asia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Inside Kashmir's lockdown: 'Even I will pick up a gun' 10 August 2019 Article 370: What happened with Kashmir and why it matters 6 August 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.