https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-23205245/can-google-design-be-consistent
Can Google design be consistent? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK Business Tech selected Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Video duration 5:55 Can Google design be consistent? Jump to media player Sumi Das reports on whether Google is too big a company to have a single design strategy. 10 Jul 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-23205245/can-google-design-be-consistent Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Google: 'We pay tax required by law' Jump to media player Scott Rubin, Communications Director, Google has been asked about Google's tax arrangements and said that his company pays what is "required by law". 17 Jun 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-22932794/google-we-pay-tax-required-by-law Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Google told to delete 'illegal data' Jump to media player Google has been ordered to delete more of the data illegally collected by its Street View cameras by the data protection regulator. 21 Jun 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-22999753/google-told-to-delete-illegally-gathered-street-view-data Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Google funds Raspberry Pi computers Jump to media player Some 15,000 Raspberry Pi microcomputers are to be donated to schools around the UK by Google as part of a push to improve computer science skills. 29 Jan 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-21254935/google-to-give-schools-raspberry-pi-microcomputers Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Should Google restrict all pornography? Jump to media player Google has defended its efforts to curb the availability of indecent images of children online after a government adviser called for tougher action. 31 May 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-22736386/online-pornography-should-google-restrict-material Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Can Google design be consistent? When people talk of Google's design, some may think of the Google Doodle on the home page. But design runs a lot deeper and, with the growing portfolio of products, Google's philosophy of keeping it simple with minimalism is proving difficult to maintain. Sumi Das reports on whether Google is too big a company to have a single design strategy. Watch more clips on the Click homepage. If you are in the UK you can watch the whole programme on BBC iPlayer. The programme was first broadcast on Saturday 6 July 2013. 10 Jul 2013 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-23205245/can-google-design-be-consistent Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: Google: 'We pay tax required by law' More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech selected Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.