https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-50428537
How a Trump tweet shook impeachment hearing - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US & Canada selected US & Canada US & Canada How a Trump tweet shook impeachment hearing Anthony Zurcher North America reporter @awzurcher on Twitter 15 November 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-50428537 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics US election 2020 Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionTrump's live-tweets interrupt hearing The curtain came up on day two of the House of Representatives' public impeachment hearings and, once again, the proceedings started off with a bang. On Wednesday, it was disclosure of an overheard phone call between Donald Trump and US Ambassador to the EU Gordon Sondland during which the president may have asked about Ukrainian investigations. Friday's big developments included the White House release of a contradictory readout of the Mr Trump's first phone call with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky and a presidential tweet that had Republicans in Congress scrambling. 1. The tweeter-in-chief Mr Trump has boasted that his conduct while in office - blunt language and shoot-from-the-hip tweeting - is "modern-day presidential". If so, welcome to a modern-day presidential impeachment hearing. Just over an hour into Marie Yovanovitch's testimony, Mr Trump launched the kind of Twitter fusillade that has become a regular part of his political repertoire. He questioned the ambassador's competence, noted that the Ukrainian president spoke unfavourably about her and pointed out that he has the right to fire diplomats at will. What makes the moment historic is that Committee Chair Adam Schiff gave Yovanovitch a chance to refute the president's tweet almost in real time. Democrats are already characterising the president's behaviour as witness intimidation - and the latest attack by the president against one of his own government employees. Republicans, whose reported strategy was to avoid directly impugning the reputation of a long-serving, well respected diplomat, will once again find a president who has changed the rules of engagement on the fly. Image copyright The Washington Post via Getty Images "I disagree with the tweet," Republican congresswoman Elise Stefank told a reporter during a break in the hearing. "I think Ambassador Yovanovitch is a public servant, like many of our public servants in the foreign service." Mike Conaway, another Republican on the committee, said the president's tweet was "not something I would do". On Wednesday, the White House said the president was not watching the impeachment hearings. On day two, the president is fully engaged. His tweeting became the big headline from the morning's proceedings, helping to underscore Yovanovitch's contention that the president himself was the driving force behind her removal. Mr Trump may not be in the hearing room, but his presence is being felt. Learn more about Trump and impeachment inquiry SIMPLE GUIDE: A basic take on what's going on GO DEEPER: Here's a 100, 300 and 800-word summary of the story WHAT'S IMPEACHMENT? A political process to remove a president VIEW FROM TRUMP COUNTRY: Hear from residents of a Pennsylvania town ON THE DOORSTEP: A Democrat sells impeachment to voters 2. The mystery of the 'missing' part of transcript On Thursday morning, the White House released a rough transcript of Mr Trump's first phone conversation with Ukrainian President Zelensky on 21 April. In it, the two exchanged pleasantries. Mr Trump congratulated Mr Zelensky on his election and suggested the possibility of a White House visit. Mr Zelensky invited the US president to his inauguration in Kyiv, and plugged his country's delicious food and hospitality. Mr Trump agreed, citing his experience with Ukrainians in his days as a beauty pageant impresario. The White House summary of the conversation released at the time, however, paints a different picture. It said Mr Trump "noted" that the Ukrainian election had been conducted in a fair and open process. It said he "underscored the unwavering support of the United States for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity". Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionA beginner's guide to impeachment and Trump And it said Mr Trump told Mr Zelensky that the two would work together "to implement reforms that strengthen democracy, increase prosperity, and root out corruption". None of those things happened. It raises questions about why Mr Trump didn't talk about corruption or endorse Ukraine's territorial integrity in the call, particularly given Ukraine's history of prosecutorial misconduct and Russian support for insurgents fighting Ukrainians in the nation's eastern border region. The summary may have been what the US foreign policy team wanted the president to emphasise, but he did not. The White House regularly produces summaries of the president's conversations with foreign leaders. The disparities between the April Ukrainian summary and the actual conversation may leave many Americans - and foreign leaders - wondering how much credence to place in those documents. Related Topics US election 2020 Donald Trump Trump impeachment inquiry Ukraine Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Trump impeachment inquiry: Right-wing media denounce 'boring' TV premiere 14 November 2019 Roger Stone: Trump ally convicted of lying to Congress 15 November 2019 Video Trump impeachment hearing: What did we learn? 14 November 2019 Video Trump impeachment: Jim Jordan probes ambassador 13 November 2019 Watching impeachment hearing in Trump country 14 November 2019 Video A beginner's guide to impeachment and Trump 14 November 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Prince Andrew stands by 'car-crash' interview 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US & Canada Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.