https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46386669
India election 2019: The next manufacturing superpower? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: The next manufacturing superpower? By Vineet Khare BBC Reality Check 13 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46386669 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Reality Check Image copyright Getty Images In the run-up to the Indian election, which gets under way on 11 April, BBC Reality Check is examining claims and pledges made by the main political parties. The Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, has undertaken an ambitious programme to generate growth in the country's manufacturing sector. While it's too early to pass judgement on Mr Modi's pledge, we can look at the progress made towards this goal. Make in India Launching the Make in India programme in September 2014, Narendra Modi promised to "raise the contribution of the manufacturing sector to 25% of GDP [gross domestic product, the total value of goods and services produced in India] by 2025". The government said it aimed to achieve this by: targeting specific sectors providing support to existing companies attracting foreign investment But the leader of the opposition Congress party, Rahul Gandhi, has strongly criticised the programme, saying manufacturing is "not firing up" and that the plan was badly thought out. An initial look at data published by the World Bank shows the contribution of the manufacturing sector has remained just above 15% in recent years. This is not only far short of the target but there is also little sign of an upward trend towards meeting it. The government has been highlighting more recent data showing signs of improving industrial growth. In a recent progress report on the Make in India project, the government points to a significant growth in manufacturing output over the past year. This, however, should be seen in the context of the current economic growth rate (GDP) of about 6-7% - rather than an increasing share of manufacturing in the total. Has the BJP kept its pledge on prices? Are India's farmers getting what they were promised? Was India's banknote ban worth it? Long-term decline Pushing for a 25% share for manufacturing has been a familiar theme for successive governments - and one that has come nowhere near being achieved. The share of manufacturing in the overall economy has been on a downward trend for a over two decades. Other economies in Asia, such as China, Korea and Japan, have been more successful in achieving higher shares of manufacturing output. China, in particular, has created large numbers of jobs in the manufacturing sector. "It's important to remember that China started with a much more broad-based and educated workforce when it embarked on its economic transition," says Swati Dhingra, from the London School of Economics. "India has seen mostly jobless growth in manufacturing even during boom periods - or at least a lack of secure employment arising from it," she adds. So, if one of the aims of Make in India was to create more jobs in manufacturing, that doesn't appear to be happening. Efforts may yet pay off The current government does point to progress in specific sectors: an increase in arms exports and defence equipment production substantial investment in the biotech industry more education and training in appropriate skills for manufacturing the commissioning of new chemical and plastics plants The annual World Bank Ease of Doing Business report also shows India moving up the rankings for 2018 - a fact that's also been highlighted by the government. And there are other encouraging signs - the automobile industry, for example, where India is emerging as a major player. Image copyright Getty Images "It is unlikely that manufacturing will increase a lot in the next five to seven years," says Abhijit Mukhopadhyay, of the Observer Research Foundation. "It takes a lot of time and sustained effort for it to be the engine of economic growth," he adds. Nevertheless, India remains one of the fastest growing economies globally, whether or not it's powered by manufacturing. A recent UN report has forecast that the Indian economy will grow by 7.6% in 2019 and 7.4% the following year, putting it ahead of other economies in the region. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on Twitter Related Topics Reality Check India India elections 2019 Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Video India's rising smartphone powerhouse 26 September 2018 Video India's solar power ambitions 25 September 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.