https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-41549756
Why does Indian PM Narendra Modi follow trolls on Twitter? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Why does Indian PM Narendra Modi follow trolls on Twitter? By Geeta Pandey BBC News, Delhi 10 October 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-41549756 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Getty Images Award-winning Indian actor Prakash Raj recently joined the long list of people asking why Prime Minister Narendra Modi follows trolls on Twitter. The actor said he was upset when he saw some people rejoicing on social media after the recent murder of his friend, journalist Gauri Lankesh. He added that he was even more upset to find out that some of these abusive trolls were being followed by Mr Modi. "Some people who are followed by our prime minister on Twitter are so brutal, and we have a PM who has closed his eyes to it," Raj said, adding that he was "disturbed, hurt... afraid of the silence of my prime minister". The backlash from the trolls was swift, they immediately dubbed him "anti-Modi" and he was criticised for his comment. The Indian prime minister is among the most popular global leaders on Twitter, with more than 35 million followers. He is a prolific tweeter and most of his tweets are about his official work, government policies, or issues close to his heart like the clean India campaign. The clever social media strategy of his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is regarded as one of the main factors behind the party's sweeping win in the 2014 elections. However, there has been criticism that he is selective and non-inclusive in his tweets. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Award-winning actor Prakash Raj recently asked why PM Narendra Modi followed trolls on Twitter For instance, his silence after a Muslim man was lynched by cow vigilantes in April for transporting cattle in Rajasthan was questioned by many - and a week after the incident, many ridiculed him for tweeting grief over an attack in Stockholm. But for months now, critics have been wondering whether a more important question is not what the prime minister is tweeting, but what he is reading? Or, more precisely, who he is reading? "A huge majority of the 1,845 people that Mr Modi follows are politicians, bureaucrats and journalists, but a significant number of them are people who denigrate critics and political opponents in most horrendous language," Pratik Sinha of Alt News, a website set up to fight fake news in India, told the BBC. 'Fearless' Indian journalist shot dead Obituary: Gauri Lankesh Gauri Lankesh in her own words "Most of them are BJP ground workers for whom a follow from the prime minister is a badge of honour, a recognition of their work," Mr Sinha said, adding that, "most are crass misogynists who use the worst possible language." Take for example some of the tweets after Gauri Lankesh was shot dead - this Hindi tweet from Nikhil Dadhich, a Surat-based businessman who is followed by PM Modi, roughly translates as: "A bitch died a dog's death and all of her litter is crying in the same voice." Mr Dadhich's offending post was deleted after the uproar and is no longer available on his timeline. Image copyright Twitter Then there was this from Ashish Mishra, also followed by the PM, who commented "Jaisi karni vaisi bharni [As you sow, so shall you reap]" while re-tweeting a newspaper announcement of Ms Lankesh's murder: Their vicious responses came in for much criticism and so did the fact that Mr Modi followed these - and other, similar - accounts. Some angry Indians even began a #BlockNarendraModi campaign and although it did not get the wide support the prime minister's critics had hoped for, it did create a buzz in India. After several people tweeted that they had blocked Mr Modi's personal account, the head of the BJP's IT cell Amit Malviya issued a statement saying "PM following someone is not a character certificate" for that person. Image copyright Twitter Pratik Sinha of Alt News says Mr Malviya is not entirely honest in his assertion that the prime minister's account has never blocked or unfollowed anyone and that Mr Modi did unfollow a former supporter, Dr Jwala Gurunath, after she accused a BJP spokesperson of unethical behaviour. While writing this article, I called Mr Malviya to ask him some questions about the prime minister's Twitter account, but he refused to answer. "I have issued a statement and I have nothing more to add to it," he told me. The prime minister is a busy man who has a million things to do, and Mr Sinha says it is unlikely that he spends a lot of time on Twitter or even operates his own account. But, according to reports, Mr Modi reaches for his iPad within minutes of waking up and spends some time looking at his social media feed, and critics say considering the vitriol unleashed by some of his supporters, his silence is troubling. It has been over a month since Gauri Lankesh was shot dead outside her home. No-one has been arrested by the police. And no-one has been unfollowed by the prime minister. "I've also been asking why can't Mr Modi unfollow these people. But I realise that it's part of their political strategy," Mr Sinha says. "These people are not really trolls. They are much more important than that, they are the party's foot soldiers on Twitter," he adds. Related Topics Narendra Modi India Internet trolls Asia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.