https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-17699304
India professor held for cartoon 'ridiculing Mamata' - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India professor held for cartoon 'ridiculing Mamata' By Amitabha Bhattasali BBC News, Calcutta 13 April 2012 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-17699304 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image caption Prof Ambikesh Mahapatra teaches at Jadavpur University in Calcutta Indian police have arrested a professor in Calcutta for allegedly posting on the internet cartoons ridiculing West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. Professor Ambikesh Mahapatra teaches chemistry at Jadavpur University. A court released him on bail. Police say he forwarded doctored images of Ms Banerjee, former Railway Minister Dinesh Trivedi, whom she recently sacked, and his replacement Mukul Roy. The cartoon went viral on the social networking site Facebook. Ms Banerjee sacked Mr Trivedi in March for not consulting her before presenting the railway budget, which included small but controversial fare increases. The cartoon is a take on Oscar-winning late Bengali filmmaker Satyajit Ray's film Sonar Kella, or The Golden Fort. It criticises Ms Banerjee's performance as a former railway minister. It also pokes fun at her for sacking Mr Trivedi from the same role. 'Derogatory' Prof Mahapatra was arrested for "spreading derogatory messages against respectable people", said Sujoy Chanda, Deputy Commissioner of Calcutta police. He did not say who these "respectable people" were. Image caption Ms Banerjee took over West Bengal last year after 34 years of Communist government The professor has been charged under India's information technology (IT) Act. Prof Mahapatra was also attacked on Thursday night, allegedly by supporters of Ms Banerjee's Trinamool Congress [TMC] party. His fellow professors and intellectuals have condemned his arrest, calling it an attack on free speech. The chief minister, who came to power in 2011 bringing to an end the state's 34-year-old Communist rule, has recently attracted a lot of negative publicity. The government's recent order to paint Calcutta blue was criticised by many. Many of Ms Banerjee's high-profile supporters, including party MP and singer Kabir Suman, theatre actor Kaushik Sen and educator Sunanda Sanyal, have also begun criticising her government. Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Profile: Bengal firebrand Mamata Banerjee 13 May 2011 The woman taking on India's communists 15 April 2011 Indian city 'to be painted blue' 17 February 2012 Minister pulls out of Dhaka trip 5 September 2011 In the pink - will it improve the city? 15 October 2006 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.