https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47249133
Pulwama attack: India will 'completely isolate' Pakistan - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Pulwama attack: India will 'completely isolate' Pakistan 15 February 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47249133 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Pulwama attack Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionIndian Interior Minister Rajnath Singh meets injured troops India has said it will ensure the "complete isolation" of Pakistan after a suicide bomber killed 46 paramilitary police in Indian-administered Kashmir. It claims to have "incontrovertible evidence" of its neighbour's involvement but has not provided it. Pakistan denies any role in the attack by militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad, which is based on its soil. Thursday's bombing of the convoy was the deadliest attack on Indian forces in the region for decades. Federal Minister Arun Jaitley said India would take "all possible diplomatic steps" to cut Pakistan off from the international community. But a Pakistani minister has asked India to reveal their evidence, and offered to help them investigate the attack. In pictures: India mourns attack victims There has been an insurgency in Indian-administered Kashmir since the late 1980s but violence has risen in recent years. Image copyright Reuters Image caption Protests were held in Jammu after Thursday's attack In the wake of the attack, authorities have imposed a curfew in parts of Hindu-majority Jammu city after an angry mob vandalised cars in a largely Muslim neighbourhood. Both India and Pakistan claim all of Muslim-majority Kashmir but only control parts of it. How will India 'punish' Pakistan? India says that Pakistan has long given safe haven to Jaish-e-Mohammad militants and accused it of having a "direct hand" in Thursday's attack. It has called for global sanctions against the group and for its leader, Masood Azhar, to be listed as a terrorist by the UN security council. India has tried to do this several times in the past but was repeatedly blocked by China, an ally of Pakistan. Mr Jaitley set out India's determination to hold Pakistan to account when speaking to reporters after attending a security meeting early on Friday. Why India and Pakistan dispute Kashmir Viewpoint: How far might India go? What is Jaish-e-Mohammad? He also confirmed that India would revoke Most Favoured Nation status from Pakistan, a special trading privilege granted in 1996. Pakistan said it was gravely concerned by the bombing but firmly rejected allegations that it was responsible. The country's Information Minister, Fawad Chaudry, asked India to show its evidence, and offered to help the investigation into the attack. "This needs evidence," he told broadcaster CNN-News18. "This needs an investigation." India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi said in a speech that those behind the attack would pay a "heavy price", leading many analysts to expect further action from Delhi. But they say that the government's military options appear limited due to heavy snow across the region. After a 2016 attack on an Indian army base that killed 19 soldiers, Delhi said it carried out a campaign of "surgical strikes" in Pakistan-administered Kashmir, across the de facto border. But a BBC investigation found little evidence militants had been hit. How did the attack unfold? The bomber used a vehicle packed with explosives to ram a convoy of 78 buses carrying Indian security forces on the heavily guarded Srinagar-Jammu highway about 20km (12 miles) from the capital, Srinagar. The bomber is reported to be Adil Dar, a high school dropout who left home in March 2018. He is believed to be between the ages of 19 and 21. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionThe blast took place on a heavily guarded highway Soon after the attack, Jaish-e-Mohammad released a video in which a young man identified as Dar spoke about what he described as atrocities against Kashmiri Muslims. He said he had joined the group in 2018 and was eventually "assigned" the task of carrying out the attack in Pulwama. Injured baby refuels India pellet gun row Is India losing Kashmir? He also said that by the time the video was released he would be in jannat (heaven). Dar is one of many young Kashmiri men who have been radicalised in recent years. On Thursday, main opposition leader Rahul Gandhi said that the number of Kashmiri men joining militancy had risen from 88 in 2016 to 191 in 2018. India has been accused of using brutal tactics to put down protests in Kashmir - with thousands of people sustaining eye injuries from pellet guns used by security forces. 'It feels like my son is always with me' by Arvind Chhabra, BBC News Punjabi Image caption Kulwinder Singh was killed in the attack on Thursday "I'm proud of my son. He has sacrificed himself for his family," says Darshan Singh, whose son, Kulwinder, died in the suicide attack in Kashmir. Mr Singh, who lives in Rauli village in Punjab, last saw Kulwinder on 10 February, before he returned to Kashmir at the end of his vacation. His son was 26 and planned to marry in November: "We talked of only his wedding. We had finalised the caterers and the venue." "It feels like my son is always with me," Mr Singh says, pointing to the jacket he is wearing. It belonged to Kulwinder and has his name embroidered on it. Darshan Singh says his son was like a friend to him and he had been waiting to see him come home with his bride. "I didn't know we would instead be waiting for his body." What's the background? There have been at least 10 suicide attacks since 1989 but this is only the second to use a vehicle. Prior to Thursday's bombing, the deadliest attack on Indian security forces in Kashmir this century came in 2002, when militants killed at least 31 people at an army base in Kaluchak, near Jammu, most of them civilians and relatives of soldiers. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionIn December Yogita Limaye examined why there had been a rise in violence in Kashmir The latest attack comes amid a spike in violence in Kashmir that came about after Indian forces killed a popular militant, 22-year-old Burhan Wani, in 2016. More than 500 people were killed in 2018 - including civilians, security forces and militants - the highest such toll in a decade. Viewpoint: Will Pakistan mend its ways on terror? The funerals driving youth to militancy The teenager blinded by pellets in Kashmir India and Pakistan have fought three wars and a limited conflict since independence from Britain in 1947 - all but one were over Kashmir. What is Jaish-e-Mohammad? Started by cleric Masood Azhar in 2000, the group has been blamed for attacks on Indian soil in the past, including one in 2001 on the parliament in Delhi which took India and Pakistan to the brink of war. Image copyright AFP/Getty Image caption Maulan Masood Azhar founded JeM in 1999 Most recently, the group was blamed for attacking an Indian air force base in 2016 near the border in Punjab state. Seven Indian security personnel and six militants were killed. India, the UK, US and UN have all designated it a "terrorist" organisation and it has been banned in Pakistan since 2002. The man who brought jihad to Britain But Masood Azhar remains at large and is reportedly based in Bahawalpur in Pakistan's Punjab province. India has demanded his extradition but Islamabad has refused, citing a lack of proof. He was arrested in Srinagar in 1999 but India released him as a part of a hostage exchange after an airliner was hijacked. How have others reacted? Mr Gandhi and two former Indian chief ministers of Jammu and Kashmir condemned the attack and expressed their condolences. The attack has also been widely condemned around the world, including by the US and the UN Secretary General. The White House called on Pakistan to "end immediately the support and safe haven provided to all terrorist groups operating on its soil". Related Topics Kashmir India India-Pakistan relations Counter-terrorism Pakistan Pulwama attack Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Pulwama attack: India mourns Kashmir dead 16 February 2019 Kashmir attack: Bomb kills 40 Indian paramilitary police in convoy 14 February 2019 Video 2018: Kashmir's violent year 21 December 2018 The funerals driving Indian Kashmir youth to militancy 14 May 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.