https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-33473689
India's Narendra Modi accepts Pakistan visit invite - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India's Narendra Modi accepts Pakistan visit invite 10 July 2015 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-33473689 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright AFP Image caption This was the first meeting between the two leaders since Mr Sharif attended Mr Modi's oath taking ceremony in May 2014 Indian PM Narendra Modi has accepted an invitation from his Pakistani counterpart Nawaz Sharif to attend a regional summit in Islamabad next year. This will be Mr Modi's first visit to Pakistan after he took power last year. A meeting between the two leaders on Friday came after increased border hostilities and India cancelled secretary-level talks last year. They also agreed to help expedite the 2008 Mumbai terror attack trial, blamed on Pakistan based militants. The suspected mastermind of the attacks, Zakiur Rehman Lakhvi, was released on bail from a Pakistani jail in April, a development that India described as "unfortunate and disappointing". He still faces trial - along with six other suspects - over the attacks, which left 166 people dead and damaged peace efforts between the two countries. In a separate development, Mr Modi accepted Mr Sharif's invitation to visit Pakistan. "Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif reiterated his invitation to Prime Minister Modi to visit Pakistan for the Saarc (South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation) Summit in 2016. Prime Minister Modi accepted that invitation," a joint statement from the two governments said. Indian Foreign Secretary S Jaishankar told reporters that the two sides had also agreed to hold a meeting of their top security advisers to discuss terrorism. Friday's meeting was the first between the two leaders since Mr Sharif attended Mr Modi's oath taking ceremony in May 2014. But relations between the nuclear-armed rivals deteriorated soon after and in August India cancelled talks with Pakistan after accusing it of interfering in its internal affairs. India's Foreign Ministry spokesperson Vikas Swarup tweeted about Friday's talks: Image copyright Twitter On the eve of the talks, India accused Pakistan of killing a border guard in a firing incident along the de facto border that divides the disputed region of Kashmir. The rivals have fought three wars since Independence, two of them over Kashmir. Kashmir, claimed by both countries in its entirety, has been a flashpoint for more than 60 years. A ceasefire agreed in 2003 remains in place, but the neighbours often accuse each other of violating it. Last September, in his first speech at the UN, Mr Modi said he wanted peace talks with Pakistan but insisted it must create an "appropriate atmosphere". In 2013 months of clashes left more than 20 Indian and Pakistani soldiers dead. Nearly as many civilians, most of them on the Pakistani side, were also killed. Related Topics Narendra Modi Kashmir India Nawaz Sharif Pakistan Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Indian media: 'Ray of hope' as Modi meets Sharif 28 May 2014 Image gallery In pictures: Life along Kashmir border 6 January 2014 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.