https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-45853364
Melania Trump says 'don't care' jacket was a message - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US & Canada selected US & Canada US & Canada Melania Trump says 'don't care' jacket was a message 14 October 2018 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-45853364 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Reuters Image caption Melania Trump wore the Zara jacket in June during a visit to Texas It was a mystery which sparked countless think pieces: Why did US First Lady Melania Trump wear a $39 jacket emblazoned with "I really don't care, do you?" during a trip to a migrant child detention centre? At the time of the June trip, Donald Trump said it was a message to the "Fake News Media". Her communications chief, however, had insisted it was "just a jacket". Now we have an answer: Mrs Trump has admitted she was sending a message. Mrs Trump visited the New Hope Children's Shelter in McAllen, Texas, on 21 June. The centre housed 55 children, including some separated from their parents as part of the Trump administration's zero-tolerance policy towards illegal immigration. However, she was criticised for wearing the controversial jacket on her way to the centre and during her return trip, although she took off the jacket before arriving at the centre itself. There was widespread speculation and criticism over what message Mrs Trump intended to send by wearing the jacket on that particular trip - although her spokeswoman said "there was no hidden message". Five things Melania's jacket could mean Melania: I'm world's most bullied person In pictures: Melania's African tour However, in an interview with ABC news that was released on Saturday, the former model acknowledged the jacket "was a kind of message, yes". "It's obvious I didn't wear the jacket for the children, I wore the jacket to go on the plane and off the plane," she said. "It was for the people and for the left-wing media who are criticising me. I want to show them I don't care. You could criticise whatever you want to say. But it will not stop me to do what I feel is right." Mrs Trump criticised the media for being "obsessed" about her clothing. "I often asking myself, if I had not worn that jacket, if I will have so much media coverage," she said, adding: "I would prefer they would focus on what I do and on my initiatives than what I wear." Mrs Trump's apparent stand delighted supporters, but critics have focused on the fact the admission has caught her team in a lie, and criticised the timing of her message. Skip Twitter post by @JackKingston More reason to love #Melania - She wore “I don’t care jacket” to drive the left crazy - and it worked!! https://t.co/3Si3WrSgd1 — Jack Kingston (@JackKingston) October 13, 2018 Report End of Twitter post by @JackKingston Skip Twitter post by @bryanbehar Melania wore that jacket to stick it to the liberals. Glad that’s what she was thinking about while visiting children in cages. — Bryan Behar (@bryanbehar) October 13, 2018 Report End of Twitter post by @bryanbehar Skip Twitter post by @Sarah_Boxer Remember when her office eyerolled, mocked, & insisted relentlessly there was no msg behind the jacket? That was a lie, as @FLOTUS makes crystal clear here. https://t.co/rahHBNALAd — Sarah Boxer (@Sarah_Boxer) October 13, 2018 Report End of Twitter post by @Sarah_Boxer Either way, it seems likely what the First Lady wears will continue to be a source of speculation throughout her husband's time in the White House, with commentators now more likely than ever to look for hidden, and not-so-hidden, messages in her outfit choices. Related Topics Melania Trump United States Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Melania Trump: 'I'm the most bullied person on the world' 11 October 2018 In pictures: Melania Trump's whistle-stop Africa tour 7 October 2018 Melania Trump jacket: Five things 'I don't care' could mean 22 June 2018 Melania Trump mocked for 'positive social media' speech 27 February 2018 Melania wears 'I really don't care do u?' jacket on migrant visit 21 June 2018 Trump backs down on migrant family separations policy 21 June 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US & Canada Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.