https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36872456/the-ohio-county-that-picks-presidents-is-leaning-trump
The Ohio county that picks presidents is leaning Trump - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US Election 2016 selected Results States A-Z Video duration 2:41 The Ohio county that picks presidents Jump to media player Ottawa County in Ohio has voted for the eventual President since 1964. Now its residents appear to be favouring Donald Trump. 22 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36872456/the-ohio-county-that-picks-presidents-is-leaning-trump Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 4:44 Can Trump win with white voters only? Jump to media player Donald Trump might have officially clinched his party’s nomination - but winning the country over could hinge on one key factor - demographics. 21 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36828113/can-trump-win-with-white-voters-only Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:02 A black Republican on race and his party Jump to media player Clarence Mingo is African-American and a Republican delegate from Ohio. Donald Trump has polled at 0% among black voters in his home state. 20 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36839494/a-black-republican-on-race-and-his-own-party Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:04 What do Republican delegates fear? Jump to media player Delegates at the Republican convention discuss whether they're fearful or hopeful for America's future. 20 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36841734/what-do-republican-delegates-fear Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:27 What actually happens at a convention? Jump to media player Every four years, US political parties hold conventions to make official whom they've selected to become their nominee for president. But what actually happens there? 17 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36799770/us-election-what-s-the-point-of-a-party-convention Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:29 Trump's VP pick: What you need to know Jump to media player Donald Trump has picked Indiana governor Mike Pence as his running mate. So who is he, and what can he do for Trump's chances of victory? 15 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36808827/trump-s-vice-presidential-pick-what-you-need-to-know Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:45 What do voters really care about? Jump to media player What are the issues that US voters care about in this election? Jane O'Brien spoke to business owners and other residents in a battleground state. 18 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36812323/what-issues-do-american-voters-care-about-in-this-election Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video The Ohio county that picks presidents is leaning Trump In 1960 Ottawa County voted for Richard Nixon while the rest of the country wanted John F Kennedy. That marked the last presidential election in which the residents of this Ohio county on the coastline with Lake Erie differed from the national result. For 13 elections in a row the country has gone the way of this so-called bellwether county. With 93% of its population being white the demographics aren't very representative of the US, but its per capita income of $28,703 (£21,896) is the US average almost to the dollar. Residents here are concerned about the economy and vote with their wallet, political leaders told the BBC. The BBC's Franz Strasser went around Ottawa County to find out which candidate has the edge in 2016. 22 Jul 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36872456/the-ohio-county-that-picks-presidents-is-leaning-trump Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: Can Trump win with white voters only? More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US Election 2016 Sections US Election 2016 Results States A-Z Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.