https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-41397022
India's $2.5bn scheme to electrify every household - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India's $2.5bn scheme to electrify every household 26 September 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-41397022 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Around 300 million Indians still live without electricity India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi has launched a 16bn rupee scheme ($2.5bn; £1.8bn) to electrify all households by December 2018. It will cover more than 40 million families in rural and urban India - roughly a quarter of the population. The "Saubhagya scheme" will largely be funded by the federal government. The government also aims to provide free electricity to poor families identified by them based on socio-economic data. Seeing the light: How India is embracing solar power What does India's ratification of the Paris climate deal mean? It will bring "a monumental change in the lives of the poor", the PTI news agency quoted Mr Modi as saying on Monday. About 300 million of India's 1.3 billion people are still not connected to the electricity distribution grid. Although the households to be covered are spread across the country, the scheme primarily targets rural India where electrification rates are much lower. Millions of rural Indians still rely on lamps fuelled by kerosene, the use of which the scheme hopes to cut. Kerosene is a huge health and environmental hazard and restricting its use would further India's ambitious climate goal to cut emissions. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption More than 40 million Indian households remain unconnected to the power grid The federal government launched an electrification programme in July 2015, under which thousands of villages were connected to the grid. But unlike the earlier scheme, the Saubhagya initiative targets individual households rather than villages. This is because a village is declared as electrified if 10% of households, schools, health centres and government offices have access to electricity. Remote, and often inaccessible, villages have proved to be a major challenge in the electrification drive. The government has said it will distribute solar packs (comprising LED lights, a fan and a plug) and a battery bank to households in these villages. Experts have said such a scheme will also expand the consumer base of state-owned power distribution companies that are struggling with debt and poor demand. The idea is that these companies will now have to supply power to newly electrified households. Related Topics Narendra Modi India Electricity Asia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.