https://www.bbc.com/earth/story/20161021-why-there-could-be-many-copies-of-you
BBC - Earth - Why there could be many identical copies of you Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC Earth Menu Home Attenborough's Story of Life Big Questions Discoveries Video Earth by email About us This media cannot be played on your device. The Big Questions Universe Why there could be many identical copies of you We ask one of the hardest questions in the Universe, is there another you out there and if so, can we find our cosmic twin? Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Reddit Share on WhatsApp Share on Google+ Share by Email Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Reddit Share on StumbleUpon Share on Google+ Share by Email By Melissa Hogenboom and Pierangelo Pirak 24 October 2016 This story is nominated for a Webby Award for Best Film & Video. Vote here. BBC Earth is also nominated for a Webby, for Best Science Website. Vote here. In theory this is not the only Universe that might exist, and in many others, identical copies of us can be found. The question is, how do we get there? BBC Earth's Melissa Hogenboom goes on the hunt for her cosmic twin. Melissa Hogenboom is BBC Earth's feature writer. She is @melissasuzanneh on Twitter. Video produced by Pierangelo Pirak; he is @ppirak on twitter. Join over five million BBC Earth fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram. If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "If You Only Read 6 Things This Week". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Earth, Culture, Capital, Travel and Autos, delivered to your inbox every Friday. Follow BBC Earth Facebook Twitter Youtube Instagram Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.