https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-49258923
Pakistan vows to fight India's 'illegal' Kashmir move - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India Asia Asia Pakistan vows to fight India's 'illegal' Kashmir move 7 August 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-49258923 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Kashmir tensions Image copyright Reuters Image caption Protesters in Lahore, Pakistan chant slogans at a rally expressing solidarity with Kashmir Pakistani PM Imran Khan has vowed to fight India's decision to revoke Indian-administered Kashmir's autonomy, including at the UN Security Council. Mr Khan said the move was in breach of international law, adding that he feared ethnic cleansing by India. The region remains locked down, a day after India announced the move. The Himalayan region of Kashmir is claimed in its entirety by both India and Pakistan, but each country controls only part of it. There is a long-running separatist insurgency on the Indian side, which has led to thousands of deaths over three decades. India accuses Pakistan of supporting insurgents - an accusation Pakistan denies, saying it gives only moral and diplomatic support to Kashmiris who want self-determination. What did Mr Khan say? The Pakistani prime minister said he wanted to "tell the world" about the decision announced by the Indian government on Monday. "Through the United Nations Security Council, we are studying it now, we will raise it in General Assembly, we will talk to heads of States at every forum... we will raise it in the media and tell the world," he told parliament on Tuesday. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Imran Khan says he fears Kashmiris will become slaves Mr Khan said he thought the removal of special status would allow India to change the demographic make-up of the Muslim-majority state. "I am afraid that [India] will now carry out ethnic cleansing in Kashmir," he said. "They will try to remove the local people and bring in others and make them a majority, so that the locals become nothing but slaves." Earlier, Pakistan's powerful army chief said his troops stood by Kashmiris in their "just struggle". Neighbouring China has also voiced opposition to the Indian move, describing it as "unacceptable". Article 370: India strips disputed Kashmir of special status What happened with Kashmir and why it matters 'India has betrayed Kashmir' What's happening on the ground? A telecoms and media blackout in Indian-administered Kashmir, combined with a curfew, is being enforced amid concern that the government's decision to revoke autonomy could trigger large-scale protests by people already unhappy with Indian rule. The BBC's Aamir Peerzada in Srinagar, who managed to access one of the few working landlines in the state, said there was a palpable sense of anger and betrayal among people he had spoken to. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionShock and concern in locked-down Kashmir Instances of protest and stone-throwing were reported and local leaders have been detained. Kashmiris in other parts of the country said that they were unable to get through to their families. Tens of thousands of additional troops were deployed ahead of the government's announcement on Monday, in what was already one of the world's most militarised zones, and more troops have been sent since. How has Kashmir's status changed? For many people in Indian-administered Kashmir, Article 370 - as the law guaranteeing special status was known - was the main justification for being a part of India. By revoking it, the Bharatiya Janata Party-led government has irrevocably changed Delhi's relationship with the region. The article allowed the the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir a certain amount of autonomy - its own constitution, a separate flag and the freedom to make laws, though foreign affairs, defence and communications remained the preserve of the central government. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Kashmir is one of the world's most militarised zones It could make its own rules relating to permanent residency, ownership of property and fundamental rights. It could also bar Indians from outside the state from purchasing property or settling there. The government said Article 370 needed to be scrapped to put the state on the same footing as the rest of India. But many Kashmiris believe that the BJP ultimately wants to change the demographic character of the Muslim-majority region by allowing non-Kashmiris to buy land there. What's happening in India's parliament? The revocation of special status was debated in parliament during the introduction of a bill relating to the division of Jammu and Kashmir into two distinct regions. The bill - which seeks to split the state into two union territories, Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh - was passed by both houses of parliament. Union territories have less autonomy from the federal government than states do. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionTwo wars, a 60-year dispute – a history of the Kashmir conflict Before it was passed, the bill drew sharp criticism from opposition MPs. Lawmakers from the south, such as those from the DMK party, expressed concern about what they saw as weakening of India's federalism. They accused the government of "denying the will of the people" of Kashmir since the decision to revoke Article 370 was taken without consulting the state's lawmakers. But the opposition is also divided. Several parties, including Delhi's AAP, have backed the decision to revoke Article 370 and bifurcate the state. Related Topics Article 370 of the Constitution of India Kashmir India Kashmir tensions Asia Pakistan Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Article 370: What happened with Kashmir and why it matters 6 August 2019 Article 370: India strips disputed Kashmir of special status 5 August 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.