https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-32235112/i-was-trafficked-into-uk-prostitution
'I was trafficked into UK prostitution' - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK selected Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say UK selected England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Video duration 5:35 'I was trafficked into UK prostitution' Jump to media player Ope, 28, tells the story of how she was brought from Nigeria to Coventry to work as a prostitute in an animated film. 10 Apr 15 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-32235112/i-was-trafficked-into-uk-prostitution Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 4:13 '18 hour days for little or no pay' Jump to media player A victim of trafficking in the UK, Mark Ovenden, and Professor Nicola Phillips from the University of Sheffield, say awareness needs to be raised of human trafficking in Britain. 10 Mar 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-21732500/uk-trafficking-victim-it-is-a-form-of-mental-imprisonment Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 4:32 Sex trafficking: Lessons for the UK? Jump to media player BBC Inside Out investigates the rise in trafficking women through UK borders to work in the sex trade and asks if Romania can provide lessons for the UK. 28 Jan 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-england-21198540/sex-trafficking-could-uk-learn-lessons-from-romania Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 1:35 Child trafficking 'on the rise' Jump to media player Children's charity, Barnardo's, says there has been an alarming rise in youngsters being sexually exploited. 13 Jan 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-21002388/child-trafficking-on-the-rise-barnardo-s Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video 'I was trafficked into UK prostitution' Nearly 800 women and girls working in the sex trade were identified as the victims of human trafficking last year, according to National Crime Agency figures seen by the Victoria Derbyshire programme. Organisations working with victims, including the Poppy Project, say the figure underestimates the scale of the problem and has been rising sharply in recent years. It is a fate experienced by Ope, 24, who in 2005 met a man offering to help her leave her life in Nigeria and find employment abroad. Her role, he said, would be as a nanny, or in a factory. She did not realise she would be forced into prostitution. Following a treacherous four-day trip by boat, with little food or water, she arrived in Madrid, Spain, where she was put to work on the streets. But after becoming the victim of rape, she was transferred to the UK by her traffickers. "It was like I was a slave," she says, on the work forced upon her. One day, while being allowed to buy food in the market, she found a lost wallet containing identification. Taking money from her traffickers, she decided to run away. But when she boarded a train at King's Cross St Pancras in London, Ope was stopped by an immigration officer and later sent to HMP Holloway. While in prison, she was helped by the Poppy Project charity, before she was recognised by the court as a victim of human trafficking. All criminal charges against Ope have now been dropped, but she may have to return to Nigeria, where she fears being re-trafficked. Ope's name and some details of her story have been changed for her own protection. Interview and animation by @jim_reed, artwork by Jesse Brown. Victoria Derbyshire is broadcast weekdays from 09:15-11:00 GMT on BBC Two, BBC News Channel and online. Follow the programme on Facebook and Twitter, and find all our content online. 10 Apr 2015 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-32235112/i-was-trafficked-into-uk-prostitution Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: '18 hour days for little or no pay' More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation UK Sections England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK selected UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.