https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-48304975
Trump unveils 'merit-based' immigration policy plan - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US & Canada selected US & Canada US & Canada Trump unveils 'merit-based' immigration policy plan 17 May 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-48304975 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionPresident Trump said applicants must have learned English and passed a civics exam US President Donald Trump has outlined plans for a new US immigration system designed to favour younger, better educated, English-speaking workers. In an address at the White House, he proposed moving away from the current system that favours applicants with family ties to the US. He said border security would be beefed up and a tougher line taken on asylum seekers. Senior Democrats dismissed his ideas as "dead-on-arrival". They say the proposed new system fails to offer a route to citizenship for so-called "Dreamers" - hundreds of thousands of people brought to the US as children but who still have no legal right to remain. What did Mr Trump say? In the White House Rose Garden, President Trump said his plans would make US immigration "the envy of the modern world". Trump's border wall - in seven charts How emergency powers could be used to build Trump's wall How much of Trump's wall has been built? "We cherish the open door that we want to create for our country. But a big proportion of those immigrants must come in through merit and skill," he said. "The biggest change we make is to increase the proportion of highly skilled immigration from 12% to 57% and we would like to even see if we can go higher." Image copyright AFP Image caption Currently many migrants coming legally into the US have family ties there He said immigrants would be "required to learn English and to pass a civics exam prior to admission". Criticising the current asylum process, he said: "Our nation has a proud history of affording protection to those fleeing government persecutions. "Unfortunately, legitimate asylum seekers are being displaced by those lodging frivolous claims." What do Democrats say? The proposals would have to be approved by Congress where Democrats currently control the lower house. "This dead-on-arrival plan is not a remotely serious proposal," said Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic speaker of the House of Representatives. "Are they saying most of the people who have ever come to the United States in the history of our country are without merit, because they don't have an engineering degree?" Democratic Congresswoman Pramila Jayapal said the proposals undermined America's family-based admissions system that she described as "the cornerstone of our country's immigration policy". Image copyright Reuters Image caption Nancy Pelosi was scathing of the proposed new policy "It does not include any protections for dreamers. It does not include any plan for the 11 million undocumented immigrants that are in this country that need a path for citizenship," she added. Although it is unlikely to progress in Congress, analysts say Mr Trump is trying to unite Republicans ahead of next year's presidential and congressional elections. In his address he added: "If for some reason, possibly political, we can't get the Democrats to approve this merit-based, high-security plan, then we will get it approved immediately after the election when we take back the House (of Representatives), keep the Senate, and, of course, hold the presidency." What other reaction is there? Analysts say many business groups are unlikely to be enthusiastic about the proposals because they do not help farmers and other seasonal employers recruit more temporary workers. Ali Noorani, executive director of advocacy group the National Immigration Forum, said it appeared the plans "would recruit skilled engineers, but not skilled farm workers". "The fact is, our economy needs both," he said. The White House's plans are also unlikely to satisfy many politicians on the right who want an overall drop in immigration numbers. Conservative commentator Ann Coulter tweeted that the proposals were "a campaign document, not even a serious bill". What's the background? President Trump has always taken a hard line on immigration and during his election campaign made the building of a wall along the Mexican border a key pledge. What is the migrant caravan heading to US? 'Why I'm leaving' - the new migrant caravan Earlier this year he declared a national emergency on the US southern border, claiming he needed special powers to build the wall to halt all illegal migration. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption'I thought we would be treated differently in US' In recent months there has been a surge in migrant "caravans" which involve thousands of people travelling through Mexico to seek asylum in the US. Mr Trump has responded by deploying extra troops and threatening to close the border. Related Topics Donald Trump Migration Donald Trump's border wall Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Trump wall - all you need to know about US border in seven charts 27 September 2019 Trump's wall: How much has been built so far? 5 January 2019 How emergency powers could be used to build Trump's wall 15 February 2019 Trump to declare emergency over Mexico border wall 15 February 2019 Trump backs down on migrant family separations policy 21 June 2018 Migrant caravan: What is it and why does it matter? 26 November 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US & Canada Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.