https://www.bbc.com/news/world-46639061
India election 2019: Is India's bullet train on time? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: Is India's bullet train on time? By Vineet Khare BBC Reality Check 15 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-46639061 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Reality Check Image copyright Getty Images India has undertaken an ambitious project for a bullet train to run between two of the country's major cities. A deal was signed in 2015 with Japan, which is helping to finance its construction. The project is part of the government's commitment to revitalise the country's creaking 165-year-old rail network. In the run-up to the Indian election, which gets under way on 11 April, BBC Reality Check is examining claims and pledges made by the main political parties. Claim: India will have a bullet train service running by August 2022. This will run down the west coast, connecting the cities of Mumbai and Ahmedabad. Verdict: Passengers may get to experience a modern high-speed train on just a small section of line by 2022. It looks unlikely the promised bullet train will be fully operational by then or even by the following year. The bullet train project was officially launched at a ceremony in September 2017 attended by the Japanese Prime Minister, Shinzo Abe. That year, the Indian Ministry of Railways said "all-out efforts" would be made to complete the high speed rail project by 15 August 2022. However, officials involved with the plan now estimate that only a small part of the route will be completed by this time, with the rest finished in 2023. The Congress opposition leader, Rahul Gandhi, has described it as a "magic train" that will never be completed. Why is it needed? India's vast rail network offers a cheap and vital transport service for 22 million people a day on about 9,000 trains. But travellers have long complained of poor services and a lack of investment in modernisation. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption India's Vande Bharat train - the fastest currently in service Currently, India's fastest train is the Vande Bharat Express, which has reached 180km/h (110mph) during trials. The Japanese bullet train is almost twice as fast, capable of speeds up to 320km/h (200mph). Once completed, the $15bn (£11bn) high-speed rail route will connect India's major business and financial hub of Mumbai with important business centres in Gujarat state such as Surat and Ahmedabad. The 500km-long journey now takes about eight hours. That's expected to drop to well under three hours, with the fastest journey times estimated at just two hours and seven minutes. When will it be finished? Some experts think even the current deadline given by officials, of December 2023, is overly optimistic. "I am not sure - considering how slow things are moving," Debolina Kundu, an associate professor at the National Institute of Urban Affairs, told BBC News. "And there are bureaucratic hurdles." Read more from Reality Check Will India become the next manufacturing superpower? Has the government controlled inflation? Is the switch to cleaner gas cooking working? The main obstacle is land acquisition. The train project needs to acquire more than 1,400 hectares (14 sq km) of land, most of it privately owned. The National High Speed Rail Corporation had been aiming to complete this process by the end of last year but has recently said it will continue until mid-2019. In February, it told BBC News there were now agreements with more than 1,000 landowners - out of an estimated total of 6,000. Image copyright Getty Images One barrier to the land sales has been dissatisfaction with the amount of compensation being offered to the owners. There have been protests in some areas over plans for land acquisition - and multiple petitions filed in the courts. And in India, court cases challenging land acquisition can drag on for years. But those running the project say they are paying compensation of 25% above the legal requirement. Another potential barrier is the need for wildlife and other environmental clearances, as the train will pass through three wildlife areas and coastal regions. It will also cross areas classified as forest - and this land can be acquired only once environmental impact studies have been completed and reforestation plans drawn up. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on Twitter Related Topics Reality Check Japan India Rail travel India elections 2019 Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story India's fastest train breaks down on first trip 16 February 2019 Viewpoint: Does India need bullet trains? 17 December 2015 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.