https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-38123659/100-women-2016-why-wear-a-hijab
100 Women 2016: Why wear a hijab? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK selected Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say UK selected England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Video duration 1:50 100 Women 2016: Why wear a hijab? Jump to media player Hala Hindawi explains why she likes to wear a hijab. Sometimes. 28 Nov 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-38123659/100-women-2016-why-wear-a-hijab Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:51 What women in Mexico think of Donald Trump Jump to media player As part of the BBC's 100 Women 2016, we hear four Mexican women on Donald Trump. 24 Nov 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-latin-america-38086488/100-women-2016-what-women-in-mexico-think-of-donald-trump Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:43 Jeanette Winterson on the power of fairy tales Jump to media player UK author Jeanette Winterson talks to the BBC's 100 Women team about the power of fairy tales. 23 Nov 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-38082166/100-women-2016-uk-author-says-updating-fairy-tales-is-important Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 3:45 Facing down the far right in Sweden Jump to media player Six months after she defied 300 Swedish neo-Nazis, Tess Asplund talks to us about making a stand. 23 Nov 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-europe-38067212/100-women-2016-the-woman-who-faced-down-300-neo-nazis Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video 100 Women 2016: Why wear a hijab? As part of the BBC's 100 Women season BBC Arabic's Hala Hindawi has a go at answering some of the most commonly asked questions about hijabs. What is 100 women? BBC 100 Women names 100 influential and inspirational women around the world every year. We create documentaries, features and interviews about their lives, giving more space for stories that put women at the centre. Other stories you might like: 'I married a man to keep my girlfriend' 'Adults are so obsessed with children they have no time for important things' Who is on the BBC's 100 Women 2016 list? 28 Nov 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-38123659/100-women-2016-why-wear-a-hijab Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: What women in Mexico think of Donald Trump More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation UK Sections England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK selected UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.