https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-england-21198540/sex-trafficking-could-uk-learn-lessons-from-romania
Sex trafficking: Could UK learn lessons from Romania? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK selected Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say England selected Local News Regions Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Sex trafficking: Could UK learn lessons from Romania? BBC Inside Out investigates the rise in trafficking women through UK borders to work in the sex trade and asks if Romania can provide lessons for the UK. Many people who are trafficked enter the country legally through South East England via our ports and airports like Dover and Gatwick. They are usually promised jobs in the UK, but they arrive to find out that what they are required to do is work in a brothel. When they get to the UK they find that their passports are often taken for security and they owe money to someone who is an organized criminal. Once victims are in the hands of traffickers it can be a difficult cycle to break. Emma Thomas visits Romania to see how it is cracking down on traffickers and asks if the UK can learn from its legislation and tougher sentencing. Inside Out South East is broadcast on Monday, 28 January on BBC One at 19:30 GMT and nationwide on the iPlayer for seven days thereafter. 28 Jan 2013 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-england-21198540/sex-trafficking-could-uk-learn-lessons-from-romania Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation England Sections England Local News Regions Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK selected UK Home England selected N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.