https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-39945744
Trump impeachment inquiry: A simple guide - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US & Canada selected US & Canada US & Canada Trump impeachment inquiry: A simple guide 14 November 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-39945744 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Trump impeachment inquiry Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionWhat does it take to impeach a president? US President Donald Trump is facing a process that could eventually see him removed from office. It all centres on whether or not he improperly sought help from Ukraine to boost his chances of re-election in 2020. Things are still at an early stage. The first public hearings started on Wednesday in the lower house of Congress, the House of Representatives. That is controlled by the Democrats. President Trump, who is a Republican, strongly denies any wrongdoing. Depending on what happens in the next few weeks, Mr Trump could end up facing impeachment - but more on what that means below. What is he accused of doing wrong? President Trump is accused of pressuring Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky to dig up damaging information on one of his main Democrat challengers, Joe Biden, and his son Hunter. Hunter worked for a Ukrainian company when Joe Biden was US vice-president. Asking foreign entities for help in winning a US election is illegal. What is the evidence? At the heart of the story is a complaint from a whistleblower - an unnamed intelligence official - who wrote a letter expressing concern about Mr Trump's 25 July call with Mr Zelensky. A rough transcript of the call revealed that Mr Trump had urged President Zelensky to investigate discredited allegations against Joe and Hunter Biden. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionWhat we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims The call came shortly after Mr Trump had blocked the release of millions of dollars in US military aid to Ukraine. A senior official later testified that the president made clear the release of the aid was conditional on Mr Biden being investigated, but the White House denies this. What is his defence? Mr Trump denies using US military aid as a bargaining chip with Mr Zelensky and has repeatedly insisted his call with Ukraine's leader was "perfect". He has called the impeachment inquiry a "witch hunt" by Democrats and elements of the media. The Republican defence comes in three parts: - Ukraine's president said he felt no pressure - The Ukrainians were unaware the aid was held back - US military aid was eventually released What is impeachment anyway? To impeach, in this context, means to bring charges in Congress that will form the basis for a trial. The US constitution states a president "shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes or misdemeanours". What is the process? It happens in two stages. Proceedings have to be started by the House of Representatives. A vote to impeach only needs a simple majority to pass and if it does, the process then moves to the Senate where a trial is held. But here, a two-thirds vote is necessary for a president's removal - and this milestone has never been reached in US history. The Senate is currently controlled by the Republican Party. Have other US presidents been impeached? Bill Clinton found himself impeached on the grounds of perjury and obstruction of justice after he lied about the nature of his affair with Monica Lewinsky and then allegedly asked her to lie about it as well. But when the trial reached the Senate in 1999, the vote for a conviction failed to get close to the two-thirds backing required. Image copyright AFP Image caption Bill and Hillary Clinton with US House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt after Mr Clinton was impeached The only other president impeached was Andrew Johnson in 1868. He was accused of, among other things, dismissing his secretary of war against the will of Congress. Mr Johnson had a narrow escape - the two-thirds majority in the Senate was missed by just one vote. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption President Andrew Johnson narrowly survived his impeachment trial Richard Nixon, the 37th US president, resigned in 1974 before he could be impeached over the Watergate scandal. Who would replace Trump? The line of succession for the US government, as established by the Presidential Succession Act of 1947, would mean Vice-President Mike Pence moving into the Oval Office. Learn more about impeachment inquiry GO DEEPER: Here's a 100, 300 and 800-word summary of the story WHAT'S IMPEACHMENT? A political process to remove a president VIEW FROM TRUMP COUNTRY: Hear from residents of a Virginia town ON THE DOORSTEP: A Democrat sells impeachment to voters Related Topics Donald Trump United States Trump impeachment inquiry US politics Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Prince Andrew stands by 'car-crash' interview 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US & Canada Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.