https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49231620
Article 370: Former chief minister says India has betrayed Kashmir - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Article 370: Former chief minister says India has betrayed Kashmir 5 August 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49231620 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Getty Images Former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti has condemned India's decision to curb the state's autonomy. Ms Mufti - under house arrest in the state capital Srinagar - said those who had participated in India's democracy had been "pushed to the wall". Delhi has revoked Article 370, which guaranteed significant autonomy to the Muslim-majority state. Ms Mufti said the decision betrayed Kashmir's decision to align with India in 1947. Article 370 allowed the state to have its own constitution, a separate flag and independence over all matters except foreign affairs, defence and communications. Ms Mufti, speaking to author and columnist Aatish Taseer in an exclusive interview for the BBC, said "we the people who had faith in the constitution of India have been proved wrong. "We have been let down by the same nation we ceded to," she said, adding that it seemed as though the state had made the "wrong choice" in aligning with India rather than Pakistan during partition in 1947. India strips disputed Kashmir of special status Why India and Pakistan dispute Kashmir Why a special law on Kashmir is controversial All of Kashmir is disputed between India and Pakistan. Both claim it in full but control only parts of it. The two neighbours, both nuclear powers, have fought two wars and a limited conflict over the Himalayan territory since the independence and partition of India seven decades ago. Home Minister Amit Shah, who announced the move in parliament on Monday, had said that Article 370 was directly responsible for poverty and the subjugation of women in the state. Article 370 included a special provision that said only permanent residents could own and buy land in Jammu and Kashmir and gave them special privileges in education and jobs. But Mr Shah said it prevented the people of the state benefiting from the central government's affirmative action policies, such as quotas in educational institutes. Other senior leaders of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), including former Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, vocally supported the move. Skip Twitter post by @arunjaitley The decision of the government will help the people of J&K the Most. More investment, more industry, more private educational institutions, more jobs and more revenue. — Arun Jaitley (@arunjaitley) August 5, 2019 Report End of Twitter post by @arunjaitley However Ms Mufti said the decision was a "sinister one" designed to change the demographics of the only Muslim-majority state. She had been placed under house arrest in the hours leading up to Mr Shah's announcement as tens of thousands of additional troops were sent into the region. She said that while it was too early to think about a response, she hoped "all the stakeholders, all the political parties, religious parties and other parties would fight together". "This constitutional relationship has been turned into an illegal occupation. So that is what we are going to be fighting about now," she said. Related Topics Kashmir India Asia Pakistan Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Kashmir: Why India and Pakistan fight over it 8 August 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.