https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-23377562/phone-recycling-getting-the-gold-from-your-mobile
Phone recycling: Getting the gold from your mobile - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK Business Tech selected Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Video duration 4:20 Getting the gold from your smartphone Jump to media player BBC News visits a mobile phone recycling plant in south London to learn what happens to your old mobile when you hand it in. 25 Jul 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-23377562/phone-recycling-getting-the-gold-from-your-mobile Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel The iPhone stripped bare Jump to media player Producer designer Geoff McCormick strips down an iPhone to explain the kind of intellectual property that resides in a modern smartphone. 16 Feb 12 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-17040699/patent-wars-stripping-the-iphone-bare Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Would you wear 'pneumatic trousers'? Jump to media player BBC News tries out a pair of air-powered trousers, created by design students in London. 23 Jul 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-23328736/would-you-wear-pneumatic-trousers Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Would you use a 'glove phone'? Jump to media player Designer Sean Miles explains how he tackled the challenge of creating 'glove phones', using recycled mobile handsets. 22 Jun 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-23008624/hands-tied-kit-designer-tests-bluetooth-glove-phone Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel How big should a phone be? Jump to media player BBC News asks a selection of mobile phone experts at an industry conference what the optimal design size of a phone is. 24 Feb 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-21531975/how-big-should-a-phone-be Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel The pub where people play video games Jump to media player BBC News visits the Meltdown pub in central London where you can play video games, and watch international video game competitions live. 26 Jun 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/magazine-23047460/digital-bar-flies-pub-where-everybody-knows-your-game Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Recycling bicycle makes money from plastic Jump to media player The BBC's Up Next series takes a look at some cutting edge technologies in the field of recycling. 10 Jul 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/magazine-23230134/the-recycling-technology-being-embraced-by-manufacturers Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Phone recycling: Getting the gold from your mobile What is the fate of your old, surplus mobile phone when you decide to turn it in for recycling? BBC News visited a recycling plant in south London to find out - and the answers might surprise you. There are more mobile phones than people in the UK. We bought more than 28 million mobile phones in 2012, with that number set to increase this year. There are good environmental reasons to recycle these old phones, whether they work or not. They contain harmful chemicals, particularly in the batteries, which don't break down in landfills. They also contain valuable materials that are costly to extract, and can be reused. And there is a financial motive to do this recycling too, which is why companies like Genuine Solutions Group in south London exist. As the firm's Peter Johnston explained, the company sifts through thousands of phones each month, sent in by phone companies and charities. Carefully dismantling the phone, the company harvests the individual parts that still work. The best value resides, Mr Johnston explained, in recovering as many working parts as possible, in order to build new working phones. Older models that have lost their cachet, may end up being sold on in developing countries. Newer models that have been rebuilt, can be sold to phone networks, or insurance companies who need to replace customer's phones. Video Journalist: Dougal Shaw Statistics from IHS Electronics and Media and OnePoll 25 Jul 2013 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-23377562/phone-recycling-getting-the-gold-from-your-mobile Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: The iPhone stripped bare More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech selected Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.