https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-50403268
Cirque du Soleil founder detained for growing cannabis on private island - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India Asia Asia Cirque du Soleil founder detained for growing cannabis on private island 13 November 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-50403268 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Mr Laliberté's company says he grows cannabis for medical and "strictly personal" use The co-founder of global circus company Cirque du Soleil has been detained for growing cannabis on his private island in the South Pacific. Billionaire Guy Laliberté turned himself in to police in French Polynesia. The Canadian entrepreneur is due to appear in court on Wednesday. In a statement, Mr Laliberté's company Lune Rouge denied he was growing the plant on his private island of Nukutepipi for commercial gain. It said that he used cannabis for "medical" and "strictly personal" purposes. The Cirque du Soleil star who 'ran off with the circus' Cirque du Soleil sold to investors Palau: Is it the world's cannabis capital? "Guy Laliberté completely dissociates himself from any rumour implicating him... in the sale or traffic of drugs," it said. Local television station Polynésie Première reported that police questioned an associate of Mr Laliberté weeks ago on suspicion of drug possession. They reportedly found images of marijuana plantations on the associate's cell phone. French Polynesia territory profile In 2015, Cirque du Soleil was sold to US and Chinese investors, but Mr Laliberté retains a minority stake. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Cirque du Soleil performances are typically characterised by elaborate costumes and daring acrobatics You might also be interested in... Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionCarly Barton is growing cannabis for medicinal purposes Related Topics Canada Billionaires Cannabis French Polynesia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Alanna Baker: The Cirque du Soleil star who 'ran off with the circus' 29 September 2017 French Polynesia territory profile 22 May 2018 Palau: Is it the world's cannabis capital? 7 July 2012 Cirque du Soleil sold to US and Chinese investors 20 April 2015 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.