https://www.bbc.com/news
Home - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC BBC News News NavigationSections HomeHome selected Video World US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers Long Reads Have Your Say More More sections HomeHome selected Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Local News Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Economy Global Education Global Car Industry Business of Sport Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers Long Reads Have Your Say BBC News Home BreakingBreaking news Close breaking news Latest Stories Most ReadSkip to most read Latest Stories Most Read Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 17m18 minutes ago China Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 17m18 minutes ago China Related content Hong Kong protests explained in 100 and 500 words Fiery stand-off at university Video Protesters arm themselves Video 52 seconds Video 52 seconds0:52 Video 52 seconds Police tear gas met with petrol bombs Clashes erupted between protesters and security forces at a Hong Kong campus overnight. 7h7 hours ago Asia Video 4 minutes 31 seconds Video 4 minutes 31 seconds4:31 Video 4 minutes 31 seconds 'They had shot the boys in the head' British Special Forces have been accused of covering up the killings of four young Afghans in 2012. 10h10 hours ago UK Woman who inherited fatal disease sues NHS A woman is suing the NHS for not revealing her father's Huntington's disease before she had a child. 3h3 hours ago Health Food and fuel shortages hit Bolivia amid crisis The interim government says it has flown supplies into La Paz to avoid protesters' road blocks. 1han hour ago Latin America & Caribbean Rugby star's 'appalling' bushfire link draws anger Israel Folau used a sermon to link Australia's bushfire crisis to same-sex marriage and abortion laws. 4h4 hours ago Australia Prince Andrew stands by 'car-crash' interview People close to him say he addressed his links to convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein "head-on". 12h12 hours ago UK Bloomberg apologises for 'stop-and-frisk' policy The former New York mayor backed a tactic that disproportionately targeted black and Latino residents. 7h7 hours ago US & Canada Australian politicians banned from China Andrew Hastie and James Paterson have refused to "repent" for their criticism of the country. 7h7 hours ago Australia Sri Lanka wartime defence chief wins presidency Gotabaya Rajapaksa is declared the winner in a poll that has split the country along ethnic lines. 15h15 hours ago Asia Bikers take to the road in memory of Harry Dunn The 19-year-old died after he was in collision with a car driven by a US diplomat's wife. 18h18 hours ago Northampton Sri Lanka wartime defence chief wins presidency Gotabaya Rajapaksa is declared the winner in a poll that has split the country along ethnic lines. 15h15 hours ago Asia Bikers take to the road in memory of Harry Dunn The 19-year-old died after he was in collision with a car driven by a US diplomat's wife. 18h18 hours ago Northampton Photographer to the stars Terry O'Neill dies aged 81 He took some of the first photographs of The Beatles, and his death is described as the "end of an era". 13h13 hours ago UK Tsitsipas wins ATP Finals title A nerveless Stefanos Tsitsipas comes from a set down to beat Dominic Thiem and become the youngest winner of the ATP Finals in 18 years. 8h8 hours ago BBC Sport Welsh couple admit spraying neighbour with hosepipe Barry and Hellynne Lee, both 72, were caught on camera turning a hosepipe on Harold Burrows. 14h14 hours ago Wales Canada and the world Paralysed hockey player moves leg after surgery Video Video Why do some people become addicts and not others? The $130m NBA star who might have been a priest Google's smart city in Toronto gets green light A sweet idea that created a $40m business Must See Video Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' How to Watch BBC World News TV The latest global news, sport, weather and documentaries Audio Listen Live Audio BBC World Service Radio Stories from around the world Video Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Video Video Five ways to distraction-proof your mind Will.i.am accuses flight attendant of racism Rock royalty sign guitar to help stroke survivor Video Video Autumn unveils Irish forester's Celtic cross Most watched 1 Video 'They had shot the boys in the head' 2 Video Further flooding hits central Venice 3 Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' 4 Video Helping coal miners to save the planet 5 Video Autumn unveils Irish forester's Celtic cross Full Story American Kurds take up Syria fight 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power 'I spend 250 days a year away from home' Sri Lanka unity a daunting task after election Why tech giants are putting billions into housing In case you missed itSee All Can being kind help you live longer? Modest fashion: 'I feel confident and comfortable' Video Video How black people shaped France 'I opposed vaccinations until my son caught polio' Zut alors! The Americans who are farming snails Most read 1 Woman who inherited fatal disease sues NHS 2 Police surround HK campus after night of violence 3 Rugby star's 'appalling' bushfire link draws anger 4 Couple admit spraying neighbour with hosepipe 5 Prince Andrew stands by 'car-crash' interview 6 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' 7 Australian politicians banned from China 8 Bloomberg apologises for 'stop-and-frisk' policy 9 Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good 10 Food and fuel shortages hit Bolivia amid crisis Around the BBC The toxic killers too small to see BBC Future Why office noise drives you mad BBC Worklife The world’s most heart-unhealthy food? BBC Travel We need to talk about vaginas BBC Culture Do you have many doppelgangers? BBC Earth Can you predict romantic desire? BBC Future 'Dopamine fasting': Tech's latest fad BBC Worklife SportSee All England 'further ahead' than in 2018 - Southgate 8h8 hours ago England Comments Verstappen wins dramatic race in Brazil as Ferraris collide 11h11 hours ago Formula 1 Comments England's mixed bag - goals galore but which defensive duo? 8h8 hours ago England Comments England complete Euro 2020 qualifying campaign with comfortable win in Kosovo 10h10 hours ago European Football Comments NFL week 11 - Wins for 49ers and Patriots after Ravens thrash Texans 1d2 days ago American football Ronaldo vows to break goals record as Portugal reach Euro 2020 7h7 hours ago European Football Chelsea beat Man Utd to go back to top of WSL 14h14 hours ago Women's Football Find us here News daily newsletter Get news from the BBC in your inbox each weekday morning Mobile app Find out more about our BBC News App Get in touch Email us at haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk Send an SMS or MMS to +44 7624 800100 Follow Have Your Say on Twitter Why you can trust BBC News News NavigationSections Sections HomeHome selected Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Local News Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Economy Global Education Global Car Industry Business of Sport Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers Long Reads Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.