https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-35723400
Kanhaiya Kumar: 'Sedition' student returns to JNU with fiery speech - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Kanhaiya Kumar: 'Sedition' student returns to JNU with fiery speech 4 March 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-35723400 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright EPA A student leader from a top university charged with "sedition" returned to his campus on Thursday, and made a fiery speech that has gone viral in India. Kanhaiya Kumar was arrested last month after a rally against the execution of a Kashmiri separatist convicted over the 2001 Indian parliament attack. He was released from jail on Thursday after being granted bail. Mr Kumar's views have been divisive in India with some calling him "anti-nationalist". The authorities allege Mr Kumar and others shouted anti-India slogans at the 9 February rally that took place at Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU). Two other students remain in custody. On Thursday, Mr Kumar returned to JNU and said in his speech that he wanted freedom "in" and not "from" India. Media reports said that close to 3,000 students turned up to hear him speak. Image copyright EPA Image copyright Reuters Mr Kumar took on Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the Indian government, saying that the backlash against him was to distract the people from its failings in other areas. He vowed to continue the "fight" against the "oppressive" policies of the government, saying that the more students were suppressed, the more they would stand up. The government has not yet commented on the speech, which has sparked a huge reaction online. #KanhaiyaKumar was trending on Facebook India, Twitter India and Twitter global trends on Thursday night, as television channels beamed his speech live. On Friday morning, the hashtag #Azaadi (freedom) was also trending in the country, though sentiments remained sharply divided. YouTube links to his speech are also being widely circulated on social media. Image copyright Twitter Image copyright Twitter Critics condemned the charges against the students as an assault on freedom of expression, but government ministers have refused to back down, vowing to punish what they describe as "anti-national elements". The 9 February rally that prompted the arrests was to mark the third anniversary of the 2013 hanging of Mohammed Afzal Guru. Guru was one of those convicted of plotting the 2001 parliament attack - charges he always denied. The attack, which left 14 people dead, was blamed on Pakistan-based militants fighting Indian rule in Kashmir. Indian opposition parties see the affair as an attempt by the BJP to push its Hindu nationalist agenda, correspondents say. There have also been counter protests by those who say JNU is a hotbed of "traitors" and should be "cleaned up". Related Topics Kashmir India New Delhi Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story India JNU student leader Kanhaiya Kumar granted bail 3 March 2016 What nationalism means to Indian 'sedition' students 24 February 2016 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.