https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-48067522
India election 2019: 22-26 April the week that was - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: 22-26 April the week that was 26 April 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-48067522 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics India elections 2019 Image copyright Getty Images Image caption PM Modi is contesting from Varanasi India has entered full election mode: voting began on 11 April, and the final ballot will be cast more than five weeks later on 19 May. Every day, the BBC will be bringing you all the latest updates on the twists and turns of the world's largest democracy. On Friday, Narendra Modi filed his nomination in Varanasi What happened? India Prime Minister Narendra Modi filed his nomination on Friday amid huge crowds. He is contesting from Varanasi constituency in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh. He travelled to the local district office in a procession of cars that stretched for several kilometres. President of the governing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Amit Shah, Home Minister Rajnath Singh and several cabinet ministers joined Mr Modi on the roadshow. Why does this matter? Mr Modi won the seat in 2014 with a huge margin of more than 300,000 votes. There was speculation that opposition parties would field a common candidate to take on the prime minister in the high-profile constituency. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Mr Modi also led roadshow on Thursday in Varanasi But the main opposition Congress party and prominent regional heavyweights like the Samajwadi Party and the Bahujan Samaj Party failed to form a coalition. And on Thursday Congress announced its own candidate for the seat, putting an end to rumours that Priyanka Gandhi herself would run against Mr Modi. Analysts say the triangular contest will help Mr Modi retain the seat. Varanasi is strategically important because the BJP hopes that Mr Modi's campaign there will help the party repeat their thumping win in the 2014 elections when it won 71 out of 80 seats in Uttar Pradesh. On Thursday, Priyanka Gandhi ended speculation that she would run against PM Modi What happened? The main opposition Congress party on Thursday named Ajay Rai to take on Prime Minister Narendra Modi in his Varanasi constituency in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh. The announcement ended weeks of speculation that Priyanka Gandhi, the charismatic sister of Congress chief Rahul Gandhi, was going be the party's candidate for the seat. Image copyright AFP Image caption Priyanka Gandhi-Vadra connects easily with the voters Mr Modi won the seat by a huge margin of more than 300,000 votes in 2014, ahead of Aam Admi Party chief Arvind Kejriwal. Mr Rai was in the third spot. Why does this matter? Ms Gandhi has always been considered the more popular of the Gandhi siblings with many blaming her brother's "lacklustre leadership" for a string of Congress defeats between 2014 and 2018. In previous elections, she campaigned in Amethi and Rae Bareli - the parliamentary constituencies of her brother and mother, Sonia Gandhi, respectively - and is held in high esteem by voters there. But she formally joined politics only in January after she was appointed the party's general secretary for eastern part of Uttar Pradesh. India votes 2019 Can Rahul Gandhi unseat PM Modi? The ancient epic dominating India's election Why jobs are at the centre of the Indian election All our latest election coverage Many in the party were hoping that she would be a formidable challenger against Mr Modi. Ms Gandhi herself had hinted that she would contest against the PM if her party asked her to do so. But the Congress' announcement ended the possibility of a so-called "mega contest". The party gained some ground in recent state elections and Mr Gandhi's stock has risen, but Congress still faces a tough challenge to beat the BJP and regain power. On Wednesday, Bollywood star Akshay Kumar interviewed PM Modi What happened? Prime Minister Narendra Modi sat down with Bollywood star Akshay Kumar for a "candid" interview, where the two discussed everything - except politics. It's unclear when the interview actually took place but it aired on the ANI television channel on Wednesday. It was filmed at the prime minister's residence in Delhi. Image copyright BJP4India/Twitter Image caption The interview was broadcast on Wednesday The "completely non-political" - as Kumar put it - conversation led to jokes on Twitter and #ModiwthAskhay was one of the top trends in India. Why does this matter? It's surprising because Mr Modi is known to avoid spontaneous interactions with the media. Televised interviews have been rare; and he has not held a single press conference in his five years as prime minister. The casual tone aside, the interview was not really freewheeling because Kumar steered clear of anything remotely political or controversial. And it spawned some snarky humour on Twitter. We learnt a few new things about the otherwise reticent Mr Modi - he "enjoys" watching memes on himself; former US president Barack Obama repeatedly advised him to sleep longer; his very own remedy for a cold involves fasting for two days and putting mustard oil in his nostrils; and West Bengal chief minister and arch rival Mamata Banerjee sends him sweets and kurtas every year. He also said he had never aspired to be prime minister; instead he wanted to join the army and "serve the nation". One user commented on how Mr Modi appeared to have narrated his biography to Kumar considering the Election Commission had held back the release of a biopic on him during the election. Mr Modi is, of course, hugely popular so there were also those who enjoyed the interview. On Tuesday, Shah Rukh Khan urged fans to vote in a music video What happened? Well, Prime Minister Narendra Modi put out a barrage of tweets on 13 March asking famous Indians to "creatively" encourage voting. And Bollywood superstar Shah Rukh Khan obliged...on Monday, some five weeks later. He said he was sorry for the delay - but Mr Modi did ask for "creativity". The Indian election kicked off on 11 April but it's so long - it's staggered over five weeks - that Khan's appeal to voters may still work. Why is this important? Khan is a huge celebrity in India and one of the few that did not immediately respond to Mr Modi's string of tweets in March. Narendra Modi bombards Bollywood with democracy-loving tweets So his tweet on Monday, although late, quickly made news. And Mr Modi was certainly impressed. It's worth mentioning that the prime minister had gone all out when he tweeted at celebrities, even channelling his inner Bollywood. Our personal favourite is the tweet in which he punned on the iconic tagline from the early noughties Bollywood blockbuster Kabhi Kushi Kabhie Gham: "It's all about loving your family." He tagged the film's two male leads, Khan and Amitabh Bachchan, and its director Karan Johar, and ended with "It's all about loving your... democracy". On Monday, any chance of a Congress-AAP alliance was doomed... What happened? The main opposition Congress party named its candidates for six out of seven parliamentary seats in Delhi, ending the possibility of a coalition with the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP). The AAP, which is the ruling party in the Delhi legislative assembly, and the Congress had earlier talked about forming an alliance to fight Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). But with the Congress going ahead with its list, we will now see a three-cornered contest in Delhi. The Congress named former Delhi Chief Minister, Sheila Dikshit, as its candidate for the North East Delhi seat. Why is this important? The AAP and the Congress both oppose the BJP, and analysts say a coalition would have avoided the splitting of opposition votes in Delhi. But both parties couldn't agree to a seat sharing agreement. The first signs that their talks were failing came when Congress President Rahul Gandhi accused Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal of making a U-turn in a tweet on 15 April. In response, Mr Kejriwal had tweeted: "What U-Turn? The talks were still on. Your tweet shows that having an alliance is not your wish. I am saddened by your comment. Today it is important to save the country from the threat of Modi-Shah [BJP chief Amit Shah]. It is unfortunate that in UP [Uttar Pradesh state] and other states you are helping Modi by splitting the anti-Modi vote." ...And PM Modi's 'nuclear button' remark sparked outrage What happened? At a rally in the northern state of Rajasthan on Sunday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi referred to India's nuclear arsenal, sparking a storm on social media. "Pakistan keeps threatening us every now and then by saying, 'We have a nuclear button'. Even if they do, they should know that India also has one. Do they think our button is for Diwali?" the PM said. Diwali is a Hindu festival of lights and firecrackers. India is no longer scared of "Pakistan's threats", he added. He also attacked the main opposition Congress party, saying that they were unable to curb terrorism when they were in power. "It is the Congress that has weakened the country. The BJP, however, is in a process to strengthen it," he said. Why is this important? Mr Modi and the governing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) have drawn flak for including India's recent strikes in Pakistan in their election campaign. Earlier this month, a row erupted over a letter from retired military officers urging President Ram Nath Kovind to ensure that political parties do not use the armed forces to "further their political agendas". Mr Modi has made national security the BJP's number one campaign plank ahead of the vote, continuously accusing the Congress of being weak on terrorism. National security has traditionally never been an election issue in India, but some analysts say that this strategy by the BJP could help galvanise voters and boost the party's chances. But Mr Modi's remarks prompted outrage on Twitter, with many calling them "flippant" and "unfortunate". Coverage from previous weeks: 15-19 April: The flying shoe returns, the BJP fields a woman on trial for a blast and a Congress spokesperson jumps ship 8-12 April: India's mammoth election kicks off and veterans try hard to be apolitical, but land in a political controversy 1-5 April: Congress presents manifesto and Facebook does a political purge 25-29 March: The BJP called the Congress' income scheme a "bluff" and Hardik Patel was ruled out from contesting 18-22 March: PM Modi's space address and Congress' ambitious income scheme 11-15 March: From Priyanka Gandhi's debut to a contentious UN vote How do you vote in the election? Here's a video explaining everything that happens inside a polling station - and what happens to your vote after that: Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionJourney of a vote Ask a question Related Topics Narendra Modi India Rahul Gandhi Bollywood Asia India elections 2019 Priyanka Gandhi Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Rafale deal: Why French jets are at the centre of an Indian political storm 26 September 2018 India Lok Sabha election: 11 things you need to know 10 April 2019 Video India elections: Three reasons why they are important 2 April 2019 Why bribes usually don't buy votes for politicians 22 May 2018 Why a problem of plenty is hurting India's farmers 8 June 2017 Video Lok Sabha elections: What do India's voters want? 11 March 2019 Manohar Parrikar: India PM Modi leads tributes 18 March 2019 India elections: Should Narendra Modi be worried? 12 December 2018 Chandrashekhar Azad: The Indian Dalit leader challenging Modi 20 March 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.