https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47397409
Abhinandan: Who is the Indian pilot captured by Pakistan? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Abhinandan: Who is the Indian pilot captured by Pakistan? 1 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47397409 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics India-Pakistan air strikes Image copyright AFP Image caption Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman Indian air force pilot Abhinandan Varthaman, captured by Pakistani forces on Wednesday, has become the point of focus amid tensions between the two countries. The fighter pilot, who has 16 years of experience, is from the southern city of Chennai (formerly known as Madras). His jet was shot down in what Islamabad called a "retaliation" to India conducting air strikes in its territory. His capture was seen as a major setback for India. The government demanded his immediate release and Indian social media was full of tweets about him, with many calling him a hero and praying for his safe return. He was returned to much jubilation two days later, in what Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan described as a "peace gesture". Dramatic details of how he was captured in Pakistan have been revealed. "I saw the Indian flag on his parachute and knew he was Indian. I also saw his plane get hit and saw him float down," Mohammad Razzaq Chaudhry, a resident of Bhimber district in Pakistani-administered Kashmir who witnessed the moment the jet was shot down on Wednesday, told BBC's Ilyas Khan. He added that locals rushed to the fallen pilot and that he was "afraid" that they might harm him. Mr Chaudhry said that some of the men were angry and attacked the pilot while others tried to stop them. "I told them not to harm him - to leave him alone until the army comes." Image Copyright @emraanhashmi @emraanhashmi Report Image Copyright @emraanhashmi @emraanhashmi Report Image Copyright @SANDIPLotus @SANDIPLotus Report Image Copyright @SANDIPLotus @SANDIPLotus Report Local media in India reported that crowds began thronging his family home soon after news of his capture spread. The Hindustan Times newspaper quoted one of his relatives as saying that they wanted the government to "secure his release" without delay. His family has refused to comment about his capture. The son of a decorated former fighter pilot, Wing Cdr Abhinandan was first commissioned as a fighter pilot in 2004. His mother is a doctor. He is reported to be in his mid-30s. His father, Air Marshal Simhakutty Varthaman, worked with decorated Tamil film maker Mani Ratnam, acting as an adviser for his 2017 film, Kaatru Veliyidai, which was set against the backdrop of the 1999 Kargil conflict between India and Pakistan. Mr Varthaman was the air marshal at the time. The Kargil conflict was the last time an Indian solider was captured and held by Pakistani forces. Group Captain K Nachiketa, who was also an air force pilot, was in Pakistan's custody for eight days after his jet crashed in their territory. Image copyright EPA Image caption Anti-India protesters in Pakistan have printed posters showing Abhinandan He is now retired and lives in the southern city of Hyderabad. "He [Wing Cdr Abhinandan] should be treated appropriately as an officer and sent back to India," Group Captain Nachiketa told BBC Telugu. "He is brave and courageous and we are all proud of him." He added that he did not want to talk about his capture but said that "all officers are trained for this and I am sure he will be with us shortly and join his unit again soon." A clip of his appearance on a local television show - NDTV Good Times - in 2011 is also being circulated widely. In it, he is heard joking about how you need a "bad attitude" to be a successful fighter pilot. He also talks about how you trust your colleagues with your life, referring to "blind faith" in your co-pilot when you're in the air. India and Pakistan in 'uncharted waters' Air strikes a 'major escalation' India demands Pakistan release pilot India had initially said that all of its pilots were accounted for, contradicting Pakistani claims that they had captured a pilot. However Pakistan's information ministry then released - and later deleted - a video showing the pilot blindfolded and with blood on his face. This prompted a furious Delhi to summon Islamabad's deputy high commissioner and condemn what it called the "vulgar display of an injured personnel". In later footage, Wing Commander Abhinandan could be seen sipping tea from a cup without a blindfold. He appeared to have been cleaned up. He said his name, military position and that he was from "down south", but refused to share any details when asked about his mission: "I'm not supposed to tell you that." In what appeared to be an edited statement aired on Pakistan TV minutes before he was handed over, the wing commander praised the Pakistani army, adding he saw potential for peace. The wing commander also criticised the Indian press, saying they always exaggerate and say a lot of damaging things that mislead people. Image Copyright @RahulGandhi @RahulGandhi Report Image Copyright @RahulGandhi @RahulGandhi Report Image Copyright @Priyanuj_Sarmah @Priyanuj_Sarmah Report Image Copyright @Priyanuj_Sarmah @Priyanuj_Sarmah Report Related Topics India-Pakistan air strikes India India-Pakistan relations Asia Wing Commander Abhinandan Pakistan Pulwama attack Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story India demands Pakistan release pilot as Kashmir crisis intensifies 28 February 2019 India and Pakistan in 'uncharted waters' 27 February 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.