https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-47706046/india-election-2019-can-modi-clean-up-the-ganges
India election 2019: Can Modi clean up the Ganges? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say World selected Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East Video duration 2:09 Cleaning up India's holy river Jump to media player In 2014 India's prime minister Narendra Modi promised to clean up the Ganges by 2020. But will India's holy river ever be clean? 03 Apr Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-47706046/india-election-2019-can-modi-clean-up-the-ganges Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:33 Is India a space superpower? Jump to media player Why is India in space and what is it doing there? BBC Reality Check takes a look. 22 Jul Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-47706047/rocket-launch-is-india-a-space-superpower Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:49 Are women in India any safer? Jump to media player Violence against women is an emotive issue in India's election campaign. Has the situation improved? 20 Mar Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-india-47586153/india-election-2019-are-women-any-safer Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video India election 2019: Can Modi clean up the Ganges? The Ganges is one of the world's most famous rivers, but for years it's been damaged by heavy pollution and overuse. For the millions who rely on it for drinking and washing, it can be hazardous. After his election in 2014, India's prime minister Narendra Modi promised to clean up the river by 2020. Reality Check asks whether he's living up to his promise. Animations by Jacqueline Galvin Research by Nitin Srivastava Produced by Nadeem Shad 03 Apr 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-47706046/india-election-2019-can-modi-clean-up-the-ganges Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: Is India a space superpower? More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation World Sections Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.