https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-england-south-yorkshire-43796330/rotherham-abuse-victim-all-i-wanted-was-to-be-believed
Rotherham abuse victim: 'All I wanted was to be believed' - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK selected Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say England selected Local News Regions Sheffield & South Yorkshire selected Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Rotherham abuse victim: 'All I wanted was to be believed' In 2014 a report revealed more than 1,400 girls had been sexually exploited in Rotherham between 1997 and 2013. Elizabeth - not her real name - was among those abused as a child. In February, her attacker, 47-year-old Ashgar Bostan, from Rotherham, was jailed for nine years. She wants more victims of child sexual exploitation to come forward. 21 Apr 2018 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-england-south-yorkshire-43796330/rotherham-abuse-victim-all-i-wanted-was-to-be-believed Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation England Sections England Local News Regions Sheffield & South Yorkshire selected Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK selected UK Home England selected N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.