https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-47721129
British-Canadian AI expert Geoffrey Hinton wins Turing Award - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK Business Tech selected Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Technology Technology British-Canadian AI expert Geoffrey Hinton wins Turing Award By Chris Baraniuk Technology reporter 27 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-47721129 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright University of Toronto Image caption Geoffrey Hinton is known as the "godfather of deep learning" British-born artificial intelligence (AI) expert Geoffrey Hinton has won the Turing Award, sometimes referred to as "the Nobel Prize of computing". Mr Hinton, who now lives in Canada, shares the award with Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun - two other proponents of deep learning, a popular form of AI. "The three of us have been the people who most believed in this approach," he told BBC News. "It's very nice to be recognised now that it is fashionable." A deep neural network uses many layers of artificial neurons, loosely mimicking the structure of animal brains. Such AI is increasingly used in products that people use every day - from smart speakers to Facebook. Deep learning is also seen as a promising, though not flawless, tool for the development of self-driving cars and other futuristic technologies. The 2019 Turing Award recipients' various engineering breakthroughs - made independently and, in some cases, together - had turned deep learning into "a critical component of computing", according to the Association for Computing Machinery, which announced the award. 15 key moments in the history of AI Will a robot take your job? Prof Hinton, who works for the University of Toronto and Google, told BBC News he and his co-recipients had all pursued deep learning even when it had been unusual to do so. "I think it's great that the computer science community has recognised that this stuff is not flaky," he said. "For many years, they thought that neural nets were not respectable. "I think we're just at the beginning of a big revolution." The other recipients have also responded to the award announcement. Yoshua Bengio, who is a professor at the University of Montreal, said on Twitter he was "extremely honoured" to be a recipient. And Yann LeCun, director of AI at Facebook, said he was "very honoured and thankful". Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the British inventor of the world wide web, won the Turing Award in 2017. What is 'deep learning'? Deep learning involves building computer programs that loosely mimic the structure of animal brains, with many layers of artificial neurons that process data. When such networks digest data, their many neurons have individual responses within each layer. These outputs are passed to the next layer until the network finally forms a decision or judgement about the input. A system such as this can learn, for example, to transcribe human speech or recognise a person's face in different photographs. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionThe BBC's quick guide to Artificial Intelligence Prof Hinton's great-great-grandfather was British mathematician George Boole. Boole invented Boolean logic, which later became a key concept in computer science. In 2015, Prof Hinton told BBC News he did not fear a hostile attack on humanity by AI, though he acknowledged there was still "a lot to worry about". When asked after his award win about the ethical questions around how AI could be misused, he said: "If you get something that increases productivity, it should be good, whether or not it actually is good [and] helps people in general is a question for the political system." When Prof Hinton finished his PhD in the 1970s, he found it difficult to find a job working in AI in the UK, which prompted his move to Canada. He is now a British and Canadian citizen. However, he said the prospects for AI researchers in the UK had since improved greatly. "You have big labs like the Deep Mind lab and there was nothing like that in 1978," he said. Related Topics Google Artificial intelligence Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Web inventor Sir Tim Berners-Lee slams UK and US net plans 4 April 2017 Intelligent Machines: Do we really need to fear AI? 28 September 2015 Alan Turing: why the tech world's hero should be a household name 18 June 2012 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech selected Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.