https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49453496
Kashmir unrest: Clashes at protest after Friday prayers - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Kashmir unrest: Clashes at protest after Friday prayers 23 August 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49453496 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Kashmir tensions Image copyright Abid Bhat Image caption The protest was initially peaceful, the BBC's Aamir Peerzada reports Security forces in Indian-administered Kashmir have clashed with protesters in the city of Srinagar. Hundreds of people took part in a demonstration after Friday prayers in the Soura neighbourhood. The march turned violent as protesters threw stones at security forces, who retaliated with tear gas and pellets. At least two were injured. Tensions have been escalating since the Indian government removed the region's partial autonomy three weeks ago. Information has also been scarce, as internet and mobile networks have mostly been blocked. Image copyright Abid Bhat Image caption The protest was held in Soura, which is becoming a centre of resistance to the revocation of Kashmir's partial autonomy Image copyright Abid Bhat Image caption Violence erupted after demonstrators pelted the security forces with stones BBC correspondent Aamir Peerzada at the scene says one man was seen bleeding from his eye and another had suffered a neck injury. The final number of wounded protesters may remain unclear. Many people who are injured with pellets do not go to hospital for fear of being arrested. Image copyright Abid Bhat Image caption The protest was held after Friday prayers in Srinagar Image copyright Abid Bhat Image caption The government in Delhi removed the region's special status on 5 August The Soura neighbourhood is fast becoming the epicentre of the resistance to Delhi's removal of the Indian-controlled region's special status. What is happening in Kashmir? Kashmir is a Himalayan territory which both India and Pakistan say is fully theirs. Each country controls part of the territory. The Indian-controlled side - the state of Jammu and Kashmir - was the country's only Muslim-majority state, and until recently had partial autonomy under Article 370 of the Indian constitution. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionThe families of two men detained in Kashmir have spoken to the BBC On 5 August the government in Delhi revoked Article 370. Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his ruling Bharatiya Janata Party argued Kashmir should be on the same footing as the rest of the country. The government also said it would break the state up into two smaller, federally-administered territories. One region would combine Muslim-majority Kashmir and Hindu-majority Jammu. The other is Buddhist-majority Ladakh, which is culturally and historically close to Tibet. Since then hundreds of people have been detained, and mobile networks and the internet have been shut down - although a partial restoration of connectivity recently has enabled some landlines to start working again. Read more on Kashmir: What happened in Kashmir and why it matters Viewpoint: Why Modi's Kashmir move is widely supported Viewpoint: Has India pushed Kashmir to a point of no return? The Indians celebrating Kashmir's loss of autonomy Related Topics Article 370 of the Constitution of India Kashmir India India-Pakistan relations Kashmir tensions Asia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Viewpoint: Why Modi's Kashmir move is widely supported in India 15 August 2019 Viewpoint: Has India pushed Kashmir to a point of no return? 13 August 2019 Article 370: The Indians celebrating Kashmir's new status 9 August 2019 Article 370: What happened with Kashmir and why it matters 6 August 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.