https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-29763582/everyday-problem
100 Women: Do we need to talk about sexism? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say World selected Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East Video duration 2:38 Do we need to talk about sexism? Jump to media player Sexual harassment, assault and rape remain huge problems for women around the world, despite a narrowing gender gap and growing equality. What can be done? 27 Oct 14 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-29763582/100-women-do-we-need-to-talk-about-sexism Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:36 100 Women: Why should we care? Jump to media player To launch the second edition of the BBC's 100 Women season, Lucy Hockings looks back at the 2013 event and at some of the key issues facing women in the world today. 26 Oct 14 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-29758796/100-women-2014-why-should-we-care Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 1:44 'Iraq's violence took my men away' Jump to media player The story of Umm Ahmed, an Iraqi woman whose son, husband and brothers-in-law vanished overnight. 26 Oct 14 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-middle-east-29723347/100-women-2014-iraq-violence-took-my-men Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 3:08 Conchita Wurst: 'I ignore the trolls' Jump to media player Austrian Eurovision winner Conchita Wurst talks to comedian Kate Smurthwaite about dealing with Twitter trolls, cross-dressing and why she doesn't want to be seen as a role model. 26 Oct 14 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-europe-29758791/100-women-conchita-wurst-meets-kate-smurthwaite Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video 100 Women: Do we need to talk about sexism? Although the World Economic Forum points each year to a narrowing global gender gap, sexual discrimination is still sanctioned by law in some countries. And in many developed countries, different aspects of sexual violence against women are still not prohibited by legislation. In this video, presented by the BBC's Esra Dogramaci, we have illustrated how women fight back against everyday sexism from New York to Egypt. You can also hear what our guests have to say about this video in a discussion on the BBC's Google+ page or join the global conversation about #100Women on Twitter @viabbc. The BBC's 100 Women season runs online, on BBC World News TV and on BBC World Service radio from 27-29 October. 27 Oct 2014 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-29763582/100-women-do-we-need-to-talk-about-sexism Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: 100 Women: Why should we care? More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation World Sections Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.