https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47025472
India election 2019: Have 100 'smart cities' been built? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: Have 100 'smart cities' been built? By Vineet Khare BBC Reality Check 25 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47025472 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Reality Check Image copyright Getty Images India's urban population is growing rapidly and is expected to reach 600 million in the next decade. Its cities are already creaking under the strain of poor infrastructure and inadequate public services. The government has undertaken a major investment programme to modernise selected cities across the country. In the run-up to the Indian election, which gets under way on 11 April, BBC Reality Check is examining claims and pledges made by the main political parties. Pledge: In 2015, the Indian government made a commitment to invest in 100 'smart cities' over five years. Verdict: The project timeline has been delayed as not all the cities were not chosen at the start of the programme, and only a small portion of the funds allocated have been used so far. What is a smart city? The government makes it clear there's no single definition of a smart city. But it's pledged to allocate funds to improve the quality of life in 100 selected cities, using the latest technological developments. Image copyright Getty Images Under the government's Smart Cities Mission, 100 cities were chosen from across the country, with the last batch only selected in 2018. These delays have led to the project missing its original deadline, which has now been extended to 2023. Under the programme, each smart city is to be provided annual federal support, with some contributions from state and local city bodies. Read more from Reality Check When will broadband reach all villages in India? Is India building enough new houses? Will India's bullet train run on time? Will India become the next manufacturing superpower? Has the project delivered? By February 2019, the government had approved 5,151 projects worth about 2,000bn rupees (about $29bn) under the Smart Cities Mission. It says 715 of the projects have now been completed, and another 2,304 are under way. Smart Cities Mission 2015-19 Billions of rupees Source: Indian government statement However, the official data shows a significant difference between allocated funding and actual project spending. A total of about 166bn rupees ($2.39bn) had been allocated to the Smart Cities Mission between 2015 and 2019. But in January this year, the government acknowledged that just 35.6bn rupees ($0.51bn) had been utilised - about 21% of the total. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The command and control centre in Bhopal city There's also been concern voiced about how the money is being used. Out of the projects approved so far, about 80% will be spent on developing areas within cities - rather than the whole city. One NGO, the Housing and Land Rights Network, has labelled the Smart Cities Mission a "smart enclave scheme". Some analysts argue the mission focuses on new projects, rather than on enhancing the capacity of existing local bodies in urban areas. So, offering bicycle-sharing facilities or building parks may not be enough unless thought is given on how to integrate them into overall city planning, they say. "The lack of coordination between implementing agencies is a major reason why the intended benefits are still not visible to the public," said a parliamentary committee report. The government says it has offered training courses to boost the capacity of existing local bodies - but it's not clear how successful these have been. The government says the pace of the project has picked up significantly in the last year. "There has been a 479% increase in projects completed since October 2017," it told India's parliament in December. Hardeep Singh Puri, the minister of state for housing and urban affairs, told the BBC that 15 integrated command and control centres are already operational under the project. "If we have 50 of these completed by December 2019 out of the 100 required, my view is that this is one of the fastest implemented projects of this kind anywhere in the world." Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on Twitter Related Topics Reality Check Urban planning India India elections 2019 Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Tomorrow's Cities: Dubai and China roll out urban robots 10 June 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.