https://www.bbc.com/sport/ice-hockey/50430901
Great Britain to face Canada in World Championships warm-up in Nottingham - BBC Sport Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC BBCSPORT All Sport All Sport Home Football Formula 1 Cricket Rugby U Tennis Golf Athletics Cycling BBC Sport Home Football Formula 1 Cricket Rugby Union Tennis Golf Athletics Cycling A-Z Sports American Football Athletics Basketball Boxing Cricket Cycling Darts Disability Sport Football Formula 1 Gaelic Games Golf Gymnastics Horse Racing Mixed Martial Arts Motorsport Netball Olympic Sports Rugby League Rugby Union Snooker Swimming Tennis Winter Sports Full Sports A-Z Events Winter Olympics Commonwealth Games Men's World Cup Women's World Cup Around the UK England Scotland Wales Northern Ireland World Sport European Football Champions League African Football Sport Africa Ice Hockey Results Fixtures Tables Results Fixtures Tables Ice Hockey Home Great Britain to face Canada in World Championships warm-up in Nottingham 15 Nov From the section Ice hockey Share this page Share this with Digg Facebook Google LinkedIn Reddit StumbleUpon Twitter Copy this link http://www.bbc.com/sport/ice-hockey/50430901 Read more about sharing. Canada's squad will depend on which players are still involved in the NHL's Stanley Cup play-offs, which are on at the same time as the World Championships Great Britain's ice hockey team are to face world number one side Canada. The Canadians, who won silver at the 2018 World Championships and bronze at the last Winter Olympics, will take on Great Britain on Tuesday 5 May at Nottingham's Motorpoint Arena. The game will be a warm-up for the 2020 World Championships in Switzerland. "Being able to attract such a big name is testament to how far the nation has come in the past few years," said Ice Hockey UK chairman Richard Grieveson. Find out how to get into ice hockey The BBC Get Inspired guide has plenty of useful tips and links to help you get into Ice Hockey Great Britain are preparing for a second successive year in the top flight of ice hockey's World Championships - they had previously not qualified for the top tier since 1994. "Canada will be a fantastic test as part of our World Championship preparations," Great Britain head coach Pete Russell, whose side lost 8-0 to Canada in Kosice in May this year. "We saw first-hand earlier this year in Slovakia what a quality nation they are and it will be great to go head-to-head with them again in Nottingham." Great Britain beat Canada in the final of the 1936 World Championships - the only time they have won the title - and lost to the Canadians in the 1937 and 1938 finals. Share this page Share this with Digg Facebook Google LinkedIn Reddit StumbleUpon Twitter Copy this link http://www.bbc.com/sport/ice-hockey/50430901 Read more about sharing. Find out more Elite League Read more on Elite League English Ice Hockey Read more on English Ice Hockey Scottish Ice Hockey Read more on Scottish Ice Hockey British Ice Hockey Read more on British Ice Hockey Ice Hockey UK Read more on Ice Hockey UK NHL Read more on NHL Top Stories England 'further ahead' than in 2018 17 Nov From the section Football Read more on England 'further ahead' than in 2018 Tsitsipas wins ATP Finals title 17 Nov From the section Tennis Read more on Tsitsipas wins ATP Finals title Verstappen wins in Brazil as Ferraris collide 17 Nov From the section Formula 1 Read more on Verstappen wins in Brazil as Ferraris collide Also in Sport Women's football weekend: Can big stadium games boost WSL? 'I chased girls and drank alcohol - and it only gave me emptiness' - Williams on finding Islam and rugby league return Watch: Browns' Garrett hits Steelers' Rudolph with helmet Warner's barbs inspired my Headingley heroics, says Stokes Watch departing Ibrahimovic's best goals for LA Galaxy The $130m NBA star who might have been a priest Gorillas, bears & duck-sized horses - Fleck & Sharp play Honesty Cards Revealed: Your England all-time XI 'A bigger achievement than medals' - Clegg returns seven months after difficult birth 'If every player isn't outraged by racism, they are part of the problem' Tree-planting, car-sharing & wildlife corridors - how green are Premier League clubs? Introducing 'The Dak': Why everyone is shaking their hips to this warm-up Explore the BBC Nobody likes a pedant mate… This gentleman is all for comedy, but not at the expense of the English language Featured Live sport online coverage from the BBC Check out the BBC Sport Live Guide for details of all the forthcoming live sport on the BBC. How to get into ice hockey Learn how to get involved in ice hockey to put your skating and hand-eye co-ordination to the test. Elite League fixtures and results Live scores, fixtures and results for Elite League ice hockey (external website). Champions League fixtures and results Live scores, fixtures and results for ice hockey Champions League (external website). Back to top Ice Hockey Results Fixtures Tables Ice Hockey Home News Feeds Help & FAQs Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.