https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-38185816/100-women-2016-hipster-and-heavy-metal-hijabis
100 Women 2016: Hipster and heavy metal hijabis - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India Video duration 4:29 The new world of hipster and heavy metal hijabis Jump to media player Along with making a religious statement, the hijab is now central to fashion in the Muslim world. 05 Dec 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-38185816/100-women-2016-hipster-and-heavy-metal-hijabis Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 1:50 100 Women 2016: Why wear a hijab? Jump to media player Hala Hindawi explains why she likes to wear a hijab. Sometimes. 28 Nov 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-38123659/100-women-2016-why-wear-a-hijab Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:31 Muslim woman poses for Playboy in hijab Jump to media player Libyan-American journalist Noor Tagouri is the first-hijab wearing Muslim to pose for Playboy. 06 Oct 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-us-canada-37545518/meet-the-first-hijab-wearing-muslim-to-pose-for-playboy Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video 100 Women 2016: Hipster and heavy metal hijabis The hijab is rising in popularity in the Muslim world. It makes a religious statement but has also become central to women's fashion. Indonesia is at the forefront of Islamic fashion but that's causing some friction with those who believe the hijab should only protect a woman's modesty. We hear from a heavy metal guitarist, a businesswoman and an Instagrammer on why they wear hijab. But an actress tells us of her fear that in the near future it might not be a matter of choice. Produced by: Rebecca Henschke. Camera/edit: Haryo Wirawan and Oki Budhi. Archive photos: Femina magazine What is 100 women? BBC 100 Women names 100 influential and inspirational women around the world every year. We create documentaries, features and interviews about their lives, giving more space for stories that put women at the centre. Other stories you might like: 'I married a man to keep my girlfriend' Science turns its attention to the female orgasm Who is on the BBC's 100 Women 2016 list? 05 Dec 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-38185816/100-women-2016-hipster-and-heavy-metal-hijabis Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: 100 Women 2016: Why wear a hijab? More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.