https://www.bbc.com/weather/features/35965295
Pakistan floods - BBC Weather Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC WeatherBBC Weather Search for a location Find a forecast Pakistan floods 4th April 2016 Last updated at 20:06 Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play. Dozens of people have been killed by flash floods caused by torrential rain in northwest Pakistan. Darren Bett has the weather forecast for the region. Weather Videos Watch Arctic tech could give early warning of floods Equipment designed to analyse sea ice has been installed in the Cairngorms to gather data on melting snow. Watch Why are Australia's bushfires still raging? As bushfires creep towards Sydney, what is the weather's influence and impact? Watch Fog - the atmospheric murkiness When the weather is calm, with temperature and humidity just right, mist forms close to the earth's surface. But why? Watch A decade of the UK's first Dark Sky Park The Scots forest has led the way in raising awareness of light pollution and promoting stargazing. Watch Fascinating facts about frost It’s definitely cold, sometimes crunchy and often sparkly. But do you know your hoar frost from your rime? Here’s Stav Danaos with all your frosty facts. Watch Air mass - what does it mean? We often talk about air mass but what does it mean? The origin of air masses plays a key part in determining what type of weather we get. Settings Language: EnglishEnglish Cymraeg Gaeilge Gàidhlig Temperature: Celsius Fahrenheit Wind speed: Miles per hour Kilometres per hour More Weather UK Weather Warnings Flood Warnings Monthly Outlook Coast & Sea About BBC Weather FAQs Feeds Elsewhere MeteoGroup World Meteorological Organization Met Office BBC Weather in association with MeteoGroup All times are GMT (Europe/London, GMT +0000) unless otherwise stated.