https://www.bbc.com/news/av/business-40011466/what-s-keeping-indian-women-from-working
What’s keeping Indian women from working? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK Business selected Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Business selected Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Video duration 2:20 What’s keeping Indian women from working? Jump to media player Just one in five women in urban areas in India are in paid employment. 25 May 17 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/business-40011466/what-s-keeping-indian-women-from-working Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 1:44 Is this world’s oldest YouTube star? Jump to media player A great-grandmother from India is winning hearts with her cooking videos. 16 May 17 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-39872650/a-great-grandmother-from-india-is-winning-hearts-with-her-cooking-videos Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 1:48 The Indian women taking off the veil Jump to media player A group of women in northern India are leading a campaign against wearing the veil, breaking centuries of tradition. 20 Oct 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-india-37701026/the-indian-women-refusing-to-wear-veils Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:23 Indian women 'not taken seriously at work' Jump to media player Women in India tell the BBC of the pressures they face, to focus on getting married and setting up a home rather than pursuing a career. 03 Jun 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/business-36445066/indian-women-not-taken-seriously-at-work Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video What’s keeping Indian women from working? India has one of the largest populations of working people in the world, but a recent report has found that fewer women are now entering the workforce. Today, just one in five women in urban areas are in paid employment. So what’s keeping India’s women from working? Read more: Why are millions of Indian women dropping out of work? 25 May 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/business-40011466/what-s-keeping-indian-women-from-working Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: Is this world’s oldest YouTube star? More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Business Sections Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business selected Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.