https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49737886
Kashmir crisis: How to read India's threat to Pakistan - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Kashmir crisis: How to read India's threat to Pakistan Soutik Biswas India correspondent 20 September 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49737886 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Kashmir tensions Image copyright AFP Image caption The fragile peace along the de facto border in Kashmir is crumbling One of the world's most protracted conflicts is getting messier. Earlier this week, India's Foreign Minister S Jaishankar, a measured diplomat-turned-politician, said India expected to have "physical jurisdiction" over Pakistan-administered Kashmir one day. Delhi and Islamabad both claim Kashmir in full, but control only parts of it - territories recognised internationally as "Indian-administered Kashmir" and "Pakistan-administered Kashmir". More than four million people live in 10 districts spread over an area of more than 13,000 sq km (5019 sq miles) in the latter. Kashmir: The complicated truth behind its 'normality' Why Modi's Kashmir move is widely supported in India What happened with Kashmir and why it matters To be sure, Mr Jaishankar was reiterating a stated Indian position on the disputed region. Image copyright Reuters Image caption Some Indians took to the streets, burning an effigy of Pakistan, after news of the air strikes broke in February In 1994, the country's parliament adopted a resolution which demanded "Pakistan must vacate the area of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir, which they have occupied through aggression". But many worry that this time there could be more to these utterances than what meets the eye. Since August three key members of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's cabinet - foreign, defence and home ministers - have forcefully iterated that Pakistan-administered Kashmir and Aksai Chin, an icy wasteland claimed by India, are part of Jammu and Kashmir. The three are members of the high-power cabinet committee on security, the final decision-making body on India's national security. India has also said it may re-evaluate its long-standing "no-first use of nuclear weapons". So is India merely upping the rhetoric weeks after stripping Indian-administered Kashmir of its autonomy and days ahead of what many say a possible face-off with Pakistan at the UN? (Across the border, Pakistan has also raised the ante on Kashmir. ) Or is it a serious threat of taking the region? "Both Indian and Pakistani leaders say things they don't mean to score political points," Husain Haqqani, former Pakistani ambassador to the US, told me. "It is most likely that Indian politicians are making such statements to try to create a new issue to counter Pakistan's narrative over India's poor human rights record in Jammu and Kashmir." Image copyright AFP Image caption Kashmir has been in a lockdown for more than a month Not everyone is so sure. They point out that Mr Modi has been following a muscular policy against Pakistan. In February, India launched air strikes against militants in Pakistani territory in response to a suicide attack in Kashmir which killed 40 Indian soldiers. Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) group had said it had carried out the attack. The strikes were the first launched across the line of control - the de facto border that divides the region - since a war between the two countries in 1971. And in September 2016, Mr Modi hit the headlines after ordering "surgical strikes" on militants across the same border. This was a response, India said, to an insurgent attack on an army base, which killed 18 soldiers. The recent Indian utterances on Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, as India prefers to call the region, "must be taken seriously by anyone studying conflict escalation paths in the subcontinent," says Suhasini Haidar, diplomatic editor of The Hindu newspaper. The two nuclear-armed rivals have already fought two wars and a limited conflict over Kashmir. Stephen Cohen of the Brookings Institution has argued that the fact that the two countries have more than 250 nuclear weapons between them has driven the conflict underground with each side testing the patience of others and limits of deterrence. But there has been a major escalation in hostilities on the border this year and the 2003 ceasefire has been under growing pressure in recent years. India's home ministry says there have been over 2,000 "unprovoked" ceasefire violations across the de facto border by the Pakistani army so far this year, in which 21 Indians have lost their lives. Pakistan says more than 45 people, including 14 soldiers, died in firing by Indian forces from across the border in 2019. Ceasefire violations on the border, according to Happymon Jacob, a professor of diplomacy and disarmament studies at Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University, can lead to "political rhetoric, military posturing, and diplomatic standoff, which can lead to more cease fire violations and even more escalation". Any which way, India has to exercise the military option to physically take Pakistan-administered Kashmir. Pakistan is not likely to give it away unilaterally or under any external pressure, of which there is very little. "Such an Indian aspiration would seem very ambitious - and long term," Christopher Snedden, author of Kashmir: The Unwritten History, told me. "Not only such an ambition actually lead to war, India would also need to provoke Pakistan into firing the first salvos, so that Delhi could justify such a massive undertaking." So is this nothing more than a continuation of a worrisome war of words between nuclear-armed neighbours? Ajai Shukla, a Delhi-based strategic affairs expert, believes India has a three-fold strategy to talking up Pakistan-administered Kashmir. First, "to divert attention from the grim reality in the Kashmir valley", which has been in a lockdown for more than a month now. "Secondly, to "unbalance Islamabad by diverting the international narrative on Kashmir. And thirdly, to create a sense of hopelessness in the minds of Indian Kashmiris and [to convey the message]: Resistance is futile." Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionBalakot: India launches air strike in Pakistan Read more from Soutik Biswas Kashmir move spells trouble for other Indian states Why people are more honest than we think 'There is no water. Why should people stay here?' How Britain tried to 'erase' India's third gender How Narendra Modi has reinvented Indian politics India's next government will have a growth problem How sugar influences the world's biggest vote Follow Soutik on Twitter at @soutikBBC Related Topics Article 370 of the Constitution of India Kashmir India India-Pakistan relations Kashmir tensions Pakistan Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.