https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-35891492/rotherham-whistle-blower-i-exposed-biggest-abuse-scandal
Rotherham whistle blower: I exposed biggest abuse scandal - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK selected Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say UK selected England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Rotherham whistle blower: I exposed biggest abuse scandal A woman who was working as a volunteer at a youth club has spoken about how she ended up exposing one of the biggest abuse scandals of our time. Jayne Senior helped reveal a pattern of child sexual exploitation which saw hundreds of children and young people groomed, gang raped and tortured - over two decades - by groups of men in Rotherham. Three brothers, their uncle, and two women were given long sentences last month after being convicted for their roles in the grooming. An official report into South Yorkshire Police's handling of the exploitation found that it was "inadequate" and that it "regularly missed" opportunities to tackle the problem. Jayne told BBC Radio 5 live Daily’s Adrian Chiles about how authorities ignored a complaint from her husband about an incident he’d witnessed. 24 Mar 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-35891492/rotherham-whistle-blower-i-exposed-biggest-abuse-scandal Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation UK Sections England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK selected UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.