https://www.bbc.com/sport/olympics/50220295
Fukushima: How baseball and Tokyo 2020 are helping the region recover from 2011 disaster - BBC Sport Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC BBCSPORT All Sport All Sport Home Football Formula 1 Cricket Rugby U Tennis Golf Athletics Cycling BBC Sport Home Football Formula 1 Cricket Rugby Union Tennis Golf Athletics Cycling A-Z Sports American Football Athletics Basketball Boxing Cricket Cycling Darts Disability Sport Football Formula 1 Gaelic Games Golf Gymnastics Horse Racing Mixed Martial Arts Motorsport Netball Olympic Sports Rugby League Rugby Union Snooker Swimming Tennis Winter Sports Full Sports A-Z Events Winter Olympics Commonwealth Games Men's World Cup Women's World Cup Around the UK England Scotland Wales Northern Ireland World Sport European Football Champions League African Football Sport Africa Olympics Rio 2016 London 2012 Beijing 2008 Rio 2016 London 2012 Beijing 2008 Olympics Home Fukushima: How baseball and Tokyo 2020 are helping the region recover from 2011 disaster By David McDaid BBC Sport in Fukushima 31 Oct From the section Olympics Share this page Share this with Digg Facebook Google LinkedIn Reddit StumbleUpon Twitter Copy this link http://www.bbc.com/sport/olympics/50220295 Read more about sharing. Media playback is not supported on this device The quake hit at 14:46 local time (05:46 GMT) and this is how the disaster unfolded Mr Kumagami sits cross-legged on his tatami floor flipping through reams of photos. There's a picture of a silver car, a family gathering, a snow-dusted garden. Then there are windows covered with blue tarpaulins, a buckled wooden floor, a hallway with the ceiling caved in, piles of stuffed bin bags. "This is my home," he says pointing. "But I can never go back there. The army turned up wearing protective masks and told us all to leave." The photos are all Mr Kumagami has to remind him of where he lived for 40 years. He is one of nearly 165,000 people who were forced to evacuate in March 2011 when the Great East Japan Earthquake struck. At magnitude 9.0 it was the most powerful quake ever experienced by a country well used to earthquakes. An hour after the first tremor, tsunami waves hit all along 670km of Japan's north-east Pacific coastline. Up to 18,000 people were killed. The tsunami is also responsible for the resulting catastrophic event at the Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in Okuma town on the Fukushima coast. At a height of around 15m, the rolling wall of seawater breached the plant's protective defences and disabled the generator for the reactor's cooling system. The reactor went into meltdown. The accident was deemed on a par with Chernobyl, albeit releasing less radioactive material. Nevertheless, radiation did spread in the wind, and Mr Kumagami's hometown of Namie lay just 10km to the north-east of the reactor. Mr Kumagami cannot return to his damaged former home The whole town and several others around it were evacuated as a 20km exclusion zone was established. "I didn't know how much radiation was in my body. I had no food or any idea what to do. I had to sleep in my car. I was in a state of panic," he says. There's one other photo in Mr Kumagami's new apartment - his ninth residence since 2011. It's bigger than the others and sits proudly in his living room next to his TV. "That's my grandaughter," he explains. "In the eight years I've lived here she's never come to visit me. "My daughter and her husband won't let her. They live in Tokyo and they're afraid of the radiation. It makes me sad." Kiyo is a joker, a self-styled "Japanese Mr Bean", and he does the facial gymnastics to match. Spotting me walking by, his eyes almost pop out of his head. A smile with more mischief than teeth stretches across his face. In a crowd of over 400 locals, the one red-haired white man sticks out. I am that sore thumb - and the other four fingers too. Kiyo can't pass up this chance. He simply has to perform his English to entertain his friends. "Oh! Hello! Your name? You are from?" The old self-deprecating broken English gag is always an audience favourite. It's a bit of fun, a comedy interlude to another Sunday afternoon at the ball game. In any case, their team isn't doing too well at bat today, and they don't see many foreigners round these parts. Not anymore, anyway. "Why you are here?" he asks. It's a fair question. When you think of must-see sporting events in Japan, the Route Inn Baseball Challenge League won't feature high on many lists. This is a minor league game in Koriyama's municipal stadium. This is pretty far-removed from The Big Show. When I explain that I'm interested in baseball and the Olympics and what all that means to Fukushima and its people who've been affected by disaster, the joker's mask slips, his face still with sincerity. "Thank you for coming to Japan," Kiyo says to me, and he shakes my hand. It may have been eight years ago now but the disaster's effects are still being felt in the region. Fukushima's reputation is still fused with its nuclear accident and the local economy is battling to recover. Sport has tried to serve as a vehicle to restore pride back to the region and help change its image. That's where baseball comes in. Kiyo is a fan of the Fukushima Red Hopes, a minor league team making a major contribution to their community. He has a busy job as a chef in a Tokyo hospital but comes home when he can to cheer on his team. Rugby may be Japan's latest fancy, but baseball is its first love. The Red Hopes are managed by Akinori Iwamura, a former player in the American Major League who took charge in the aftermath of the 2011 disaster. The 40-year-old had no prior link to this part of Japan, which lies over 250km from Tokyo and feels like a world away, surrounded by a green landscape of rice fields, hills and rivers. "I was coming to the end of my playing career and I could see the people of Fukushima trying to get on with their lives in the face of adversity following the disaster," he says. "I asked myself if there was anything I could do to help. So I thought about using the power of baseball and heard there was an opportunity at this team. We want people to come and watch a game and forget about their stress; we want to bring a smile back to their faces." It's been five years since Iwamura began his mission. And judging by the animated faces in attendance at the Red Hopes game, the team is having some form of positive impact. "No one used to laugh like this," says Yoshitsugu, a 49-year-old mechanic who is a Red Hopes regular. "After 2011 everyone was down; we couldn't watch TV without being reminded about what happened. This team makes us feel good." The crowd at a Fukushima Red Hopes match in Koriyama Like around 40,000 of Fukushima's citizens, the Red Hopes themselves are currently displaced. Their regular home is at the Azuma Stadium in Fukushima City, 60km north of Koriyama. For now, the sound of drums and co-ordinated chanting echoing around the bleachers has been replaced by the chugging of diesel engines. Azuma Stadium is undergoing a transformation in order to be ready to welcome the world to Fukushima next year when Olympics comes to town. The Tokyo 2020 Organising Committee and Japanese government decided to stage one Olympic baseball match and six softball games there. They are even calling the these Games 'The Reconstruction Olympics' in recognition of the power it could have in the disaster-affected areas. "The recovery of Fukushima isn't something we residents can achieve on our own, we also need the help and efforts of people from outside," says Takahiro Sato, who's in charge of Olympic and Paralympic promotion in the prefecture. "On the one hand, through the Olympics, we want to show the world how far Fukushima has come. But on the other hand, that we're still facing various challenges. "Compared with nationwide our foreign tourism is still low. So we want people to see the attraction of Fukushima. By actually coming here they can see that and also try many of the great foods we have here." The sentiment and objectives are admirable. But 50km south-east of the Azuma Stadium lies the breached Daiichi nuclear reactor and exclusion zone. And given that radiation did spread from the facility, the question of visitor and athlete safety is only a natural one. Works are being carried out on the Azuma Stadium in readiness for next year's Olympics In Tokyo's Shibuya area, FabCafe is a single-origin coffee shop where you can also have all of your 3D printing and laser cutting needs serviced 'while-u-sip'. It's the ground floor of an office block that's home to floors of 'creative lounge space' where various small, disparate companies and projects are being developed in its open-planned environment. In one corner is a workbench bedecked with circuit boards and soldering irons. An American steps forward to welcome me. Azby Brown is a New Orleans native who's studied and lectured in architecture in Tokyo since the 1980s. He's also a volunteer at Safecast, a non-profit citizen science organisation set up in the wake of the disaster. "Life changed in 2011 for a lot of people. I felt compelled to step up and try to help," he says. Safecast developed a self-assembly Geiger counter kit, which constantly pools readings for their open-source online database of radiation levels around Fukushima. Safecast is an international, volunteer-centered organisation devoted to open citizen science for the environment Brown says the motivation was to fill a gap of information - and trustworthy information - at a time when he says more official sources were confusing and at times erroneous. "The government has said they wanted the Games there in 2020 and so a lot of decontamination and preparation had to be done," he says. "But I kind of feel it's a bit rushed and I totally understand why people might not feel comfortable. If a person in Japan themselves is not sure it's OK, then how is an overseas visitor going to feel comfortable? "I don't think the government has done a very good job of giving people the information they need to make those judgements." Safecast's citizen volunteers have aimed to provide the clarity they felt was missing with 'scientifically valid' data readings. Brown and his colleagues also feel that their information allays those safety concerns around Fukushima's suitability to stage Olympic events. "Fukushima does have residual radiation left over from the accident," he says, "But the places where the Olympics are going to be held like Fukushima City and Azuma Stadium are pretty much normal. "There's never no risk but the levels are lower than some cities in other parts of the world. People don't often realise that you can receive 10 times the dose of radiation on a long haul flight than you'd get in most places in Fukushima. "You'd have to go into the exclusion zone - where you often can't get permission to enter - to get a similar dose. "So by spending 8-10 hours on a flight you'd get more natural cosmic radiation than even a couple of days where the Olympics will be held in Fukushima. "People are also sceptical about the food and most of our team members are convinced that the food there is safe as well." By way of back-up, Brown's colleague Louis Elstow, an English academic studying how people live in radiation-contaminated areas, shows me some photographs of a food-monitoring station in a recently re-opened village that was previously off limits. The machines installed in community centres allow locals to test whether their locally-sourced produce is within acceptable radiation levels for consumption. Once tested a screen shows a simple circle for 'safe' or a cross for 'unsafe'. It's a facility that Mr Kumagami might find useful. "I offer to send my daughter some of the lovely fruit we grow here but she says they won't eat it," he says. "It's nonsense, but they refuse." As someone whose life, even eight years on, continues to be affected by the events and perceptions that remain from the earthquake of March 2011, what's his take on the Olympics coming to Fukushima next summer? "I'm grateful for the idea that they're trying to help Fukushima's recovery by giving it a chance to showcase itself. "If people from lots of different countries come here and enjoy themselves I do believe it will be helpful to our recovery." If foreign visitors can discover another side to Fukushima at the Olympics then maybe people closer to home might feel more comfortable visiting as well. Parts of Fukushima are still contained within an exclusion zone to protect from radiation Mr Kumagami outside his new apartment View Comments Share this page Share this with Digg Facebook Google LinkedIn Reddit StumbleUpon Twitter Copy this link http://www.bbc.com/sport/olympics/50220295 Read more about sharing. Top Stories England 'further ahead' than in 2018 17 Nov From the section Football Read more on England 'further ahead' than in 2018 Tsitsipas wins ATP Finals title 17 Nov From the section Tennis Read more on Tsitsipas wins ATP Finals title Verstappen wins in Brazil as Ferraris collide 17 Nov From the section Formula 1 Read more on Verstappen wins in Brazil as Ferraris collide More from Sport Insight 'I never saw him suffering' - remembering Robert Enke, 10 years on The footballers who escaped East Berlin 'A Muslim kid in a race? I'd be like: "Keep going girl!"' The Olympic venue recovering from nuclear disaster The 'unique story' of South Africa's first black captain A tragedy that stunned football - told by those who were there The American champion millions watched crash to earth The Pochettino-Levy dynamic shaping Tottenham's 'crisis' Going back to run the race that almost killed you Breaking Bolt's record, 10 months after giving birth Uncovering Japan's mysterious rugby past 'Do we want to have a family? Or do we want to run fast?' The Ajax prodigy struck down by tragedy 'Zidane knows drastic things can happen' Ranked 556th in a cut-throat world: Stories from tennis' other side The remarkable Mr Vokrri: Kosovo's football rise Shakhtar, the champions who fled from war The inside story of Neymar's on-off Barcelona return The 'bunch of cast-offs' who made NFL history The pioneering champion America forgot The race for $1m that's 'designed to break you' The elite sports hospital that imports body parts Inside the mind of an Ashes captain How is Solskjaer changing Man Utd? 'This World Cup win will do wonders for England. Inshallah' The mysterious death that haunts boxing The ‘legendary’ US sports star most Americans don’t know Riding the 'Tour de France' that doesn't exist The stateless street hustler who became basketball's biggest star The knife attack that changed a champion Charisma, controversy, cricket: Chris Gayle, 'Universe Boss' The 3,100-mile race around a single New York block 'I cried every day' - the cyclist who turns pain into triumph Why did Messi walk away from Argentina? Sacrifice, success & the shootings: Jamaica's tenacious World Cup star Will the World Cup be a cultural turning point for France? How the Dutch came back from 'crisis' The 'skinny schoolkid' among the super-humans: Robertson’s rise The man who lost a brother, father & uncle to biking, but races on 'Pure luck', guts & pandemonium: How Man Utd won 1999 Treble From war to Wimbledon: How Belgrade bombings shaped Djokovic The woman who ‘had to fight and claw' her way into motorsport The disputed 'smuggler's haven' ruled by Moldova's 'football kings' The third-tier football club labelled 'terrorists' in Turkey Son Heung-min: Moulded by his father, mobbed in South Korea 'Maradona Land' - How 'Argentina's Ajax' unearthed a legend How Ajax build success and prepare for break-up The mind threatening sport’s ‘impossible’ bar Is the NFL Combine sport's weirdest test? Istanbul: Colour, passion and the new power backed by a president Solskjaer's early years & the Norwegian town that shaped him Love, loyalty & sacrifice in Seville: Joaquin's Betis story 'I left my youth behind and became a man' Inside Croatia’s fiery 'Eternal derby' The NFL star abandoned on London's streets Juan Mata: 'There's a risk football's essence will be lost' Louis van Gaal: Legacy, retirement and 'his truth' about Man Utd What is a manager's interview really like? Determination, desire & defence: Declan Rice's rise Assurances and challenges for Zidane - Balague column The fallout when East & West Germany met 'People died getting us to a cricket match. We were lucky to survive’ 'She knew she'd never walk again. You wonder, how would I cope?' Football in Madrid – but not as you know it How Hodgson became 'one of the English greats' Cycling & suffering - a special relationship Why has momentum slowed behind Joshua? Simeone: The 'street fighter' taking on Spain's giants The stories that could define F1 in 2019 How Canada built a Premier League Has Mourinho been left behind and can he reinvent himself? Murder, drugs and football on the Mexican border An unlikely football future in India's slums Made in Largs: How the Scottish seaside town shaped Mourinho, Capello & Villas-Boas From rough diamond to Juventus 'jewel' - the rise of 'Gladiator' Dybala How 'Superman' had his world changed by stroke Superga: The crash that killed Serie A's champions Back to top Olympics Rio 2016 London 2012 Beijing 2008 Olympics Home News Feeds Help & FAQs Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.