https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47266001
Pulwama attack: India mourns Kashmir dead - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Pulwama attack: India mourns Kashmir dead 16 February 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47266001 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Pulwama attack Image copyright EPA Thousands of mourners have been attending funerals across India for some of the security force personnel killed by a suicide bomber in Indian-administered Kashmir on Thursday. At least 40 paramilitary police died in the attack near Srinagar. The militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad said it carried out the attack. India has imposed a swathe of economic measures on Pakistan after the attack, including revoking Most Favoured Nation trading status and raising customs duty to 200%. India will 'completely isolate' Pakistan How far might India go? Why India and Pakistan dispute Kashmir Although Jaish-e-Mohammad is based in Pakistan, Islamabad has denied any role in the attack. Both India and Pakistan claim all of Muslim-majority Kashmir but control only parts of it. Image copyright EPA Relatives of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) soldier Sukhjinder Singh mourn as his coffin is taken to his cremation ceremony at the village of Gandiwind in the Tarn Taran district of India's Punjab state. Image copyright AFP The cremation is held for CRPF trooper Kaushal Kumar Rawat in Agra. Image copyright EPA CRPF and Rapid Action Force soldiers hold candles in tribute to dead colleagues during a vigil in Bhopal. Image copyright Reuters Image copyright Reuters CRPF officers bow in tribute (top) to colleague Bablu Santra in Howrah, West Bengal, as his mother (above right) mourns him in the village of Bauria. Image copyright AFP CRPF personnel stand guard over the coffins of Sudip Biswas and Bablu Santra at Kolkata airport. Image copyright Reuters People attend a vigil in front of the India Gate war memorial in Delhi. Image copyright AFP Image copyright AFP The coffin of Mahesh Kumar Meena arrives near Allahabad (top) and hundreds gather on the bank of the Ganges for his funeral procession. Image copyright EPA Dozens more gather for the return of the body of CRPF member Tilak Raj at his home in the village of Dhewa Jandroh, 90km (55 miles) from Dharamsala. Image copyright EPA Tension remains high in Jammu, Indian-administered Kashmir, amid a curfew. All pictures copyright Related Topics Kashmir India India-Pakistan relations Pulwama attack Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.