https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-36762043
Why the death of militant Burhan Wani has Kashmiris up in arms - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Why the death of militant Burhan Wani has Kashmiris up in arms 11 July 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-36762043 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright AFP Image caption For many Kashmiris Burhan Wani represented the spirit and political aspirations of a new generation Militant leader Burhan Wani's death in a gun battle with government forces in Indian-administered Kashmir has sparked days of deadly violence. Who was he and why was he so popular, asks local journalist Shujaat Bhukari. Burhan Wani's funeral was attended by thousands of people, and despite restrictions, the funeral venue was so crowded there was no space to conduct funeral prayers. Wani, 22, is largely credited with reviving and legitimising the image of militancy in Muslim-majority Indian-administered Kashmir. The region has seen an armed insurgency against Indian rule since 1989, although violence has waned in recent years. New age militant Born to a highly-educated upper-class Kashmiri family, Wani - it is believed - was driven to militancy at the age of 15, after his brother and he were beaten up by police "for no reason". Wani was extremely active on social media, and unlike militants in the past, did not hide his identity behind a mask. Image copyright AFP Image caption The fresh outbreak of violence led to at least 23 deaths over the weekend Image copyright AFP Image caption The upsurge of violence is the worst Indian-administered Kashmir has seen for years His video messages, which would often go viral in Kashmir, were on the topics of Indian injustice and the need for young people to stand up to oppression. In his last video he had warned local police of "consequences" if they continued to resist the "movement". India considered Wani a terrorist, but for many locals he represented the spirit and political aspirations of a new Kashmiri generation. Indian officials have admitted that he was instrumental in persuading local boys to take up arms in the state. Isolation from India But Wani's popularity can be considered as more of a manifestation of the current mood and upsurge of violence in Indian-administered Kashmir, which has been influenced by several incidents. Two popular "uprisings" in 2008 and 2010 saw the death of more than 200 people, many of them civilian protesters, killed by Indian forces. The hanging of Afzal Guru, a Kashmiri separatist convicted over the 2001 Indian parliament attack, also intensified anger and a sense of isolation. The final straw in recent times, seems to be the decision by the People's Democratic Party (PDP), which won elections in the Muslim-majority Kashmir valley, to form a coalition with India's ruling Hindu nationalist BJP which performed well in the neighbouring Hindu majority region of Jammu. Image copyright AFP Image caption Wani is largely credited with reviving and legitimising the image of militancy in Indian-administered Kashmir Police records confirm that some of the young men who have recently become militants had actively canvassed for the PDP in the 2014 general elections. Analysts in the area say that the absence of political engagement to resolve the Kashmir dispute is setting a new political discourse and militancy is gaining legitimacy among people who believe Delhi is ignoring political realities. The question that is being asked now, is if Wani is more dangerous to India now that he is dead. The challenge the government now faces is fighting the ideology that Wani promoted, clearly reflected in the outpouring of sentiment over his killing. Shujaat Bukhari is the editor of Rising Kashmir newspaper, Srinagar Related Topics Kashmir India Pakistan Social media Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Kashmir clashes over militant Burhan Wani leave 30 dead 11 July 2016 Kashmir violence: 16 die after key militant killed 10 July 2016 Why a cricket match caused student unrest in Kashmir 8 April 2016 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.