https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-38218232
India Jayalalitha death: Masses mourn 'iron lady' - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India Jayalalitha death: Masses mourn 'iron lady' 6 December 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-38218232 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption'She was our lighthouse, our God - why has she left us?' J Jayalalitha, one of India's most influential and colourful politicians, has been buried in the presence of tens of thousands of mourners. The 68-year-old chief minister of the southern state of Tamil Nadu suffered a heart attack on Sunday night and died at 23:30 (18:00 GMT) on Monday. Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Pranab Mukherjee are among those attending the state funeral. Her grave is located next to that of her mentor, MG Ramachandran. Ramachandran, an actor turned politician, was instrumental in introducing her to politics. The fact that Jayalalitha was buried is unusual, as members of her caste are always cremated. However, senior members of her party were quoted by Indian media as saying that she transcended caste for her people, and burying her next to her mentor would also give the people a "monument" to remember her by. Image copyright Sanjoy Majumder Image caption A sea of people joined the funeral procession at Chennai's Marina beach A sea of people joined her funeral procession headed to Marina beach in Chennai. Earlier, her body, draped in the Indian flag, was on display at a large public hall. Extra police have been deployed in the state amid fears of unrest due to the extreme devotion she inspires among her supporters, many of whom refer to her as "Amma" (mother). There were concerns that they could resort to self-harm or violence, but crowds have been orderly and disciplined apart from a few minor scuffles. At the scene: Sanjoy Majumder, BBC News Image copyright AP From the early hours people streamed into the large public park inside which Jayalalitha's body lay in state, wrapped in the national flag. They converged into the arena from all directions, as the police struggled to control the flow. It was so intense that you felt there could be a stampede at any moment, as men and women surged forward in waves, straining to catch a glimpse of their beloved "Amma". Many were visibly distraught. "Amma why have you left us," one woman wailed, while another beat her chest. By the coffin were the VIPs - the prime minister, senior politicians and celebrities. But those below were the ordinary men and women who formed the bedrock of her support. "We don't know what will happen to us now," one man muttered, his voice breaking. Another told me he had come from Sri Lanka. "I came to see her because she is my mother," he said simply. A seven-day period of mourning has been declared in Tamil Nadu. Jayalalitha had been receiving treatment for months and was last seen in public in September. Image copyright @AIADMK Image caption Jayalalitha's body, draped in the Indian flag, was on display at a large public hall Image copyright @AIADMK Image caption Tens of thousands of people flocked to pay their respects She is revered by many but was seen by her critics as having created a cult of personality over the years. Rare pictures of India's extraordinary Jayalalitha Obituary: Jayaram Jayalalitha The 'goddess' of Tamil Nadu politics The women who rule India Tributes began to pour in for her as soon as her death was confirmed by the Apollo hospital, which had been treating her since 22 September. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionA look back at the career of J Jayalalitha Image copyright AFP Image caption There were fears her death could spark unrest given the extreme devotion she inspires among her supporters Image copyright AP Image caption Some ran beside an ambulance carrying her body out of the hospital "RIP Jayalalitha" has been trending on Twitter, while Facebook is also filled with elegies for a woman who is widely respected for managing to hold her own in the male-dominated world of Tamil Nadu politics. Khushboo Sundar, film actress and Congress party spokesperson, told the BBC: "It's very painful for me. Despite our political differences, I had respected her. We were hoping against hope, none of us wanted her to lose this battle. "She was a symbol of strength for women like me. She fought against so many odds to make a name for herself in a male-dominated profession like politics. We have a lost a great politician, and a great champion of women's rights." Image copyright AFP Image caption Jayalalitha's admirers remain unbowed in their admiration for her Image copyright AP Image caption Extra police have been deployed in Chennai and across the state Image copyright Reuters Image caption Accusations of corruption against Jayalalitha failed to dim her supporters' admiration for her A senior politician of Jayalalitha's AIADMK party, O Panneerselvam, was sworn in as chief of Tamil Nadu within hours of her death, the party's Twitter account confirmed. Jayalalitha lived a dramatic life, both on screen and off. She appeared in more than 100 films before turning her hand to politics in the early 1980s. Jayalalitha later won control of the AIADMK from its late founder's wife, before leading it to victory in 1991, the first of four occasions she would do so. She was accused of corruption on several occasions, and spent two short spells in prison - most recently in 2014. But a Karnataka high court order in 2015, which cleared her of involvement in a corruption scandal, paved the way for her return to power. Jayalalitha's admirers remain unbowed in their admiration for her and argue she has played a key role in the development of Tamil Nadu as one of India's most economically influential states. Related Topics India Tamil Nadu Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Rare pictures of India's extraordinary Jayalalitha 6 December 2016 Jayalalitha: The photograph 'ruling' an Indian state 25 October 2016 J Jayalalitha: Why ailing leader has Indian state on edge 7 October 2016 The women who rule India 16 May 2011 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.