https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-38188288/100-women-2016-women-walk-streets-of-mumbai-after-midnight
100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video 100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight A group of Indian women are walking the streets of Mumbai after midnight to show men that they have a right to be there. Every four minutes in India in 2015, a sexual crime against women was reported to the police, Across the vast nation, women are starting to speak out about the violence they have faced. Five times world champion boxer Mary Kom has revealed she was molested as a teenager and says society must change. Filming and editing by Neha Sharma. Reporting by Divya Arya. What is 100 women? BBC 100 Women names 100 influential and inspirational women around the world every year. We create documentaries, features and interviews about their lives, giving more space for stories that put women at the centre. Other stories you might like: 'I married a man to keep my girlfriend' Science turns its attention to the female orgasm Who is on the BBC's 100 Women 2016 list? 05 Dec 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-38188288/100-women-2016-women-walk-streets-of-mumbai-after-midnight Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.