https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-50408246
Impeachment: How an overheard phone call could damage Trump - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US & Canada selected US & Canada US & Canada Impeachment: How an overheard phone call could damage Trump Anthony Zurcher North America reporter @awzurcher on Twitter 13 November 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-50408246 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Trump impeachment inquiry Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionKey moments from Trump impeachment hearing Going into the first day of public impeachment hearings, it seemed as though details of the proceedings would be relatively familiar for those who have followed the last month of coverage of closed-door testimony from a parade of current and former government officials. Toward the end of his opening statement, however, acting US Ambassador to Ukraine Bill Taylor changed the script. He revealed that one of his aides had been with US Ambassador to the EU Gordon Sondland as he carried out a phone conversation with Donald Trump following a meeting with Ukrainians on 26 July, the day after the now-famous Trump-Zelensky phone call. According to Taylor, his aide heard Trump ask about "the investigations" - and Sondland replied that Ukraine was ready to move forward. Sondland then told Taylor's aide that the president cared more about the investigation of the Bidens than anything else involving Ukraine. This has the potential to be a major twist. Skip Twitter post by @awzurcher At the recess after 45 minutes of Democratic questioning. Planned or not, Taylor's report of a staffer listening to a July call between Trump and Sondland is going to be the news "hook" out of the morning's proceedings. pic.twitter.com/4qqn66BZ4p — Anthony Zurcher (@awzurcher) November 13, 2019 Report End of Twitter post by @awzurcher There's been considerable testimony about Sondland's interaction with the Ukrainians, and the ambassador himself has testified that he told Ukrainian officials on 1 September that he presumed US military aid was probably being withheld until they opened investigations. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionA Democrat and a Republican react to the first public impeachment hearing During his Wednesday appearance, Taylor spoke of how Sondland told him that the president, as a businessman, wanted what was "owed him" before he "signed the cheque" and that there would be a "stalemate" if Ukraine didn't act - which Taylor interpreted as meaning military aid would not resume without investigations. Although there have also been reports of Sondland's direct line to the president, there has yet to be evidence tying Mr Trump directly to the alleged quid pro quo. The phone call Taylor described could change all that. In the middle of Wednesday's hearing, the House Intelligence Committee announced a new witness scheduled to give a closed-door deposition on Friday, an aide to Taylor named David Holmes - reportedly the aide Taylor mentioned. Learn more about Trump and impeachment inquiry SIMPLE GUIDE: A basic take on what's going on GO DEEPER: Here's a 100, 300 and 800-word summary of the story WHAT'S IMPEACHMENT? A political process to remove a president VIEW FROM TRUMP COUNTRY: Hear from residents of a Virginia town ON THE DOORSTEP: A Democrat sells impeachment to voters Next week, Sondland himself is scheduled to testify during public hearings. Although the ambassador did not mention the phone call with the president in his original closed-door testimony, he's already had to update that testimony to reflect a new recollection of his discussions with Ukrainian officials about military aid. Democrats may be hoping he does so again. If either Sondland or Holmes supports Taylor's account, it could undercut the president's defenders who have suggested that Mr Trump was not closely involved in the activities of the "unofficial" channel of Ukraine policy, as Taylor called it, which was pressuring Ukraine to open up investigations into the Bidens. Skip Twitter post 2 by @awzurcher Things you don't see on TV: Republican Congressman Jim Jordan running off the dais to consult with staff while Democrats take their turn asking questions of the witnesses. Republicans are trying to coordinate their questioning on the fly. pic.twitter.com/wdhzrlOtyt — Anthony Zurcher (@awzurcher) November 13, 2019 Report End of Twitter post 2 by @awzurcher Just last week, when asked about his relationship with Sondland, Mr Trump said, "I hardly know the gentleman". If the president was taking direct calls from the ambassador after Ukrainian meetings, however, that assertion seems less believable. Later on Wednesday, during a joint press conference with Turkish President Recep Erdogan, the president went on record saying he didn't recall the call - "not even a little bit". "I know nothing about that," he said. "First time I've heard it." That sets up the possibility that Holmes or Sondland may offer testimony that contradicts the president in the days ahead. In the meantime - either by happenstance or planning - the first day of open public impeachment hearings has its catchy headline and created a new avenue for investigation - and political speculation. A timeline of Trump-Ukraine story Who's who - meet the cast of characters Trump’s man in Brussels in eye of the storm "Democrats land damning new evidence in impeachment inquiry," heralded the website Politico. "William Taylor's big impeachment reveal," read The Atlantic. "Bill Taylor dropped a bombshell," echoed Vox. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionWhat US coal country makes of Trump impeachment It was enough to have some Republicans crying foul. "He prepped for hours to come up here. And then all of a sudden, voila, he gets this miraculous intervention from one of his staffers that reminds him of something?" Republican Congressman Mark Meadows told reporters outside the committee hearing room. "When we start to look at the facts, everybody has their impression of what truth is." After the day's biggest revelation, Democrats have reason to be pleased, while the president's team has a new set of headaches. Related Topics Donald Trump United States Trump impeachment inquiry US politics Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US & Canada Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.