https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46557662
India election 2019: Are three times more roads being built? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: Are three times more roads being built? By Salman Ravi BBC Reality Check 19 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46557662 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Reality Check In April 2018, India's Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, said his government was building more roads than ever. "Today, the volume of work that is being done every day is three times what was done previously," he said. India has one of the largest road networks in the world, covering a total of 5.5 million km (3.4 million miles). In the run-up to the Indian election, which gets under way on 11 April, BBC Reality Check is examining claims and pledges made by the main political parties. Claim: The current government says it is building three times as many roads in India, compared with previous governments. Verdict: Road-building has gone up significantly under this government, although not as much as Mr Modi has claimed. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption A recently opened stretch of highway in Delhi Road infrastructure in India is divided into three categories: national highways state highways rural roads At independence in 1947 the total length of national highways in India - the main routes that cross the country - was around 21,000km. By 2018, it had gone up to almost 130,000km. National highways are funded and constructed by the government, in Delhi, and state highways by state governments across India. Rural roads come under the Ministry of Rural Development, in Delhi. Read more from Reality Check Do more Indians than before have access to toilets? Will India's bullet train run on time? Will India become the next manufacturing superpower? India election 2019: Is the switch to gas in the kitchen working? Construction rate rises Official government data for the past decade shows the total length of highways built each year increased sharply after 2014, when the BJP came to power. In its last year in office, in 2013-14, the previous Congress-led government built 4,260km of national highway. In 2017-18, the current BJP government built a total of 9,829km of highway - more than double but not as much as three times the 2013-14 figure. National highways in India Total built each fiscal year Source: Ministry of Road Transport In a December 2018 review, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways said more than 300 government highway projects would be completed by the end of 2019. The present government has also set aside increasing amounts in the budget each financial year for developing national highways. Budget allocated to highways Billions of Indian rupees Source: Indian government data The Highways and Transport Minister, Nitin Gadkari, has said roads and highways are "a country's assets". And his efforts have even been praised by opposition Congress party leader Sonia Gandhi. Rural road building Plans for extending roads in rural areas are not new - in fact, they date back to a previous BJP-led government in 2000. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The BJP claimed that construction of rural roads reached an all-time high in 2016-2017 In May last year, the current BJP government said more than 47,000km of rural roads had been constructed in the financial year 2016-17. "Construction of rural roads reached an all-time high in 2016-17, under the Modi government," it said. However, official data for the past decade shows that 2009-10 saw an even higher length of rural roads built - 60,117km. And this was when a Congress-led government was in power. Rural roads built in India In km per fiscal year Source: Ministry of Rural Development Since the BJP came to power, the budget for rural roads has increased every financial year - to expand the network to less accessible areas. And the World Bank, which has been helping finance rural road building since 2004, said, in a report issued in December 2018, that progress had been "highly satisfactory". Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on Twitter Related Topics Reality Check India India elections 2019 Infrastructure Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Video The women in India building a road to a new life 28 November 2018 Can India really halve its road deaths? 15 September 2016 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.