https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46640789
India election 2019: Are India's farmers receiving what they were promised? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: Are India's farmers receiving what they were promised? By Saroj Singh BBC Reality Check 4 April 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46640789 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Reality Check Image copyright Getty Images The plight of India's farmers has been a major theme in the campaigns ahead of national elections, which get under way on 11 April. Angry farmers have regularly taken to the streets demanding a better financial deal. Many find themselves in debt and burdened by other liabilities they've taken on to buy seed, fertilisers and equipment. Thousands of farmers commit suicide every year in India, although the reasons are often complex. Pledge: Speaking in 2016, India's Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, said farmers' incomes would double by 2022. Verdict: Official data shows farmers' incomes were rising between 2013 and 2016. Income data for the past two years is not available but there are signs the rural economy is depressed. Unless there is a significant upturn, the doubling of farm incomes by 2022 is unlikely. The government has now pledged to pay 6,000 Indian rupees (£64) a year to help farmers with holdings of less than two hectares (20,000 sq m), in a bid to reach that goal. These moves have been criticised by opposition parties as vote-buying ahead of the elections. The agricultural sector employs more than 40% of the workforce in India, despite its shrinking contribution to the country's gross domestic product (GDP), the total value of goods and services produced. What's happened to farming incomes? In 2016, the average monthly income of a farming household was about 9,000 Indian rupees (£100), according to a survey conducted by the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development. This report also found that farmers' income had increased by 40% in the three years up to 2016, the latest year for which data is available. However, there is evidence of a more recent slowdown in the rural economy. According to one estimate, farm income, which had grown by more than 14% in the year to 2017, slumped to just over a 2% growth rate between 2017 and 2018. And in several state elections in December 2018, the ruling BJP fared poorly - something put down to growing discontent in rural areas. What problems do farmers face? Droughts, bad weather and a lack of modern equipment have plagued Indian agriculture for decades. In addition, many of India's farmers work on vulnerable small or marginal holdings. The current administration has introduced pro-farming policies that include: a crop insurance scheme a soil health card scheme to improve productivity an online trading platform for agricultural produce But it's also faced criticism for other policies that have negatively affected farmers - such as the sudden decision to 2016 withdraw the 500 and 1,000 rupee notes from circulation in a bid to tackle the black economy. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption There are issues with storage and processing Why aren't farmers earning more? A very good harvest in any year will result in a sharp fall in the price of a commodity. This helps keep food prices in check for urban consumers but is not so good for rural producers. Why a problem of plenty is hurting India's farmers. Helping India's farmers out of debt To counter this, the government sets a minimum purchase price for major agricultural products each year. However, a recent official report pointed out serious shortcomings of these price controls. It cited a lack of awareness among farmers, delays in payments and insufficient facilities to enable farmers to store produce at government-controlled warehouses. At various times over the years, national and state governments have also announced loan waivers for farmers to write off their debts. These schemes are expensive and not everyone qualifies for help. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on Twitter Related Topics Reality Check India Agriculture India elections 2019 Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story India farmers: Tens of thousands march against agrarian crisis 30 November 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.