https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-47249982
Pulwama attack: What is militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India Asia Asia Pulwama attack: What is militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad? 15 February 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-47249982 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Pulwama attack Image copyright Reuters Image caption It was the single deadliest attack in Indian-controlled Kashmir since 1989 Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), a Pakistan-based group, has claimed responsibility for the suicide bombing on 14 February in Indian-administered Kashmir. At least 46 soldiers died, making it the deadliest single attack against Indian forces in the region since 1989. The group is designated a terror organisation by India and the UN, as well as the UK and the US. It aims to unite Kashmir with Pakistan and has been held responsible for attacks in India and Kashmir. Media reports say JeM spokesman Muhammad Hassan spoke of "dozens of [Indian] forces' vehicles" destroyed in the attack, when the bomber rammed a convoy in a vehicle filled with explosives. Why India and Pakistan dispute Kashmir Viewpoint: How far might India go to 'punish' Pakistan? What is JeM? Jaish-e-Mohammad literally means the Army of Mohammad. Pakistan-based Muslim cleric Masood Azhar founded the group after he was released by India in 1999. He was one of three men set free in exchange for the crew and passengers of an Indian Airlines plane hijacked and flown to Taliban-ruled Afghanistan. Image copyright AFP/Getty Image caption Maulana Masood Azhar founded JeM in 1999 Mr Azhar reportedly met with the former Taliban leader Mullah Omar and with al-Qaeda head Osama Bin Laden when he was in the country. India blame JeM for an attack on their parliament in New Delhi in December 2001 - a claim JeM denies. JeM was officially banned in Pakistan soon after that attack but the group still operates, sometimes using the names Afzal Guru Squad, Al-Murabitoon and Tehreek-al-Furqan. More recently, India has blamed JeM for an attack on its Pathankot airbase near the Pakistani border in January 2016, which left three security forces dead. Is India losing Kashmir? Kashmir territories - full profile JeM commander Noor Mohammad Tantray was killed by Indian forces in December 2017, which was seen as a massive blow to the organisation. But the violence did not abate, and a report in the Indian newspaper The Print suggests covert Pakistani support may be the reason for its expansion. JeM has however attacked Pakistani military targets and even made an attempt on former leader Pervez Musharraf's life in 2003, despite India's accusations that Pakistan harbours the group. What have India and Pakistan said? India frequently asks its neighbour to extradite Masood Azhar - reportedly in the eastern Pakistani province of Punjab - but Pakistan refuses, saying there is a lack of proof against him. Image copyright Reuters Image caption Right wing Hindus burn photos of Mr Azhar and Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan New Delhi has also called on the UN to list Masood Azhar as a global terrorist, but Pakistan's close ally China continues to block the move. Speaking after the Pulwama attack, India's foreign ministry demanded that Pakistan "stop supporting terrorists and terror groups operating from their territory, and dismantle the infrastructure operated by terrorist outfits to launch attacks in other countries". But Pakistan has condemned any suggestion it is linked to the attack. "We have always condemned acts of violence anywhere in the world," a foreign office spokesman said. Additional reporting by BBC Monitoring Related Topics Kashmir India India-Pakistan relations Pakistan Pulwama attack Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Is India losing Kashmir? 26 April 2017 Kashmir territories - full profile 1 March 2016 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.