https://www.bbc.com/news/av/magazine-41310547/hell-in-a-bottle-i-survived-an-acid-attack
Hell in a bottle: I survived an acid attack - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Hell in a bottle: I survived an acid attack On average in 2016, there were two acid attacks a day. 2017 is now projected to be the year with the highest number of attacks ever recorded in the UK. Over the past few years there has been a change in the way acid has been used. No longer just associated with shame or honour attacks, acid is now a weapon used by moped thieves as well as a means of settling gang disputes. We follow four separate acid attack victims who highlight this growing trend. Producer by Ashni Lakhani Directed & Edited by Alvaro Alvarez Executive Producer Ravin Sampat 21 Sep 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/magazine-41310547/hell-in-a-bottle-i-survived-an-acid-attack Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.