https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47540452
India election 2019: Should farmers' debts be written off? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: Should farmers' debts be written off? By Saroj Singh BBC Reality Check 29 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47540452 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Reality Check Image copyright Getty Images Many farmers in India have found themselves overwhelmed by debt - but should those loans be written off, often at great expense? That's a question politicians and others in India have been debating in the run-up to nationwide elections in April. Claim: India's Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, says waiving loans for farmers is not really a solution, comparing it to handing out "lollipops" at election time. But the Congress opposition says its proposed loan waivers would be an effective means of helping farmers in need. Verdict: The evidence from loan schemes implemented in the past suggests they don't address the deep-rooted problems facing farmers. Governments of all colours - both at the national and state level - have written off loans. Between 2014 and 2018, loan waivers were announced in 11 states, by both BJP and Congress administrations, at a total cost of more than a trillion rupees (£10bn). What problems do farmers face? Over 40% of India's workforce is employed in agriculture. Farmers sometimes borrow heavily to buy seeds, equipment and other essentials but then struggle with debt. Poor harvests due to bad weather can devastate crops, leading to financial disaster and in some cases to farmers killing themselves. One report last year said levels of debt in rural India had been rising in recent decades, notably in those households engaged in farming. Rising rural debt in India % of households in debt Source: National Sample Survey Office In recent years, farmers have also seen relatively small increases in real wages and stagnant or falling crop prices. Does writing off debts work? But it's far from clear whether debt relief schemes actually help farmers in distress. For one thing, the link between indebtedness and farmer suicide is far from straightforward. Suicide is often higher in wealthier states. And within those states, the wealthier farmers rather than the poorest with the most debts are more likely to kill themselves. There are other questions too about the effectiveness of debt relief schemes. After a nationwide loan waiver in 1990, evidence emerged of a decline in the rate of recovery of non-waived loans by financial institutions. It suggested that loan waivers created expectations of future write-offs, leaving borrowers with little incentive to pay back existing loans. In one state, the loan recovery rate fell from nearly 75% to just over 40% in the year after a loan waiver had been announced. Image copyright Getty Images A further nationwide scheme - worth 515bn rupees - was announced in 2008 ahead of general elections the following year. But a subsequent government audit concluded that it had been poorly implemented. This included money being given to farmers who were ineligible and some farmers who were eligible not receiving anything. Critics of these schemes have also pointed out that many famers borrow informally from family, friends or local money lenders and do not therefore benefit from the loan waivers. Supporting the rural economy Some farmers' groups and lobbyists have been calling for a one-off write-off of all farmers' debts, and then a rethink of how best to support the agricultural economy. But waiving all loans could turn out to be hugely expensive. One estimate - by former Agriculture Secretary Siraj Hussain - puts the cost of a one-off nationwide debt relief payment as high as 3bn rupees. "This amount could only be freed up at the expense of other welfare programmes," he told BBC News. Other ideas for relieving farmer distress are now being implemented. One example is in the southern state of Telangana, where all farmers owning at least an acre (4,000 sq m) of land receive a guaranteed subsidy each growing season. Other states have implemented similar projects and in February this year the federal government announced a plan to support small-scale farmers across the country with a guaranteed annual income support of about 6,000 rupees. Tens of millions of farmers have received the first instalment. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on Twitter Related Topics Reality Check India Agriculture India elections 2019 Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story India farmers: Tens of thousands march against agrarian crisis 30 November 2018 Protesting India farmers: 'We want what we were promised' 12 March 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.