https://www.bbc.com/bitesize/guides/zxy3k2p/revision/4
The Great Depression, 1929-1933 - CCEA - Revision 4 - GCSE History - BBC Bitesize Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC Bitesize All Bitesize Change language English Cymraeg Gaeilge Gàidhlig Home Learn & revise Support Careers My Bitesize All Bitesize GCSE CCEA The Great Depression, 1929-1933 In October 1929, the Roaring Twenties came to a dramatic end and the USA economy went into deep depression. Part of History Life in the United States of America, 1920-33 Twitter Facebook WhatsApp Share Share this with Twitter Facebook WhatsApp Copy link Read more about sharing Revise quizTest previous 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Page 4 of 8 next The impact of Hoover’s policies on the lives of the workers For many workers the Great Depression was a period of misery and destitution. Unemployment increased: It rose from 1.6 million in 1929 to 14 million in 1933 (i.e. from 3 per cent to 25 per cent of the workforce). People were desperate for work. For example, in 1930 there were 6,000 men on the streets of New York trying to survive by selling apples. Wages fell: As competition for jobs increased, even those in work suffered. Employers reduced wages and increased hours. Some government employees, for example teachers, were not paid when city councils, for example in Chicago, went bankrupt. Starvation grew: Workers struggled to buy even the basics, such as food. In 1931 about 100 died directly of starvation in New York hospitals. Many more died of illnesses related to a lack of nutrition. One third of children in New York were malnourished. Homelessness soared: By 1932 over 250,000 people could not pay their mortgages. Those who fell behind with their mortgages or their rent were evicted. Most ended up either on the streets sleeping on park benches or living in Hoovervilles , i.e. shanty towns on the edges of cities made of cardboard boxes or corrugated iron shelters with no facilities. A large number of men (estimated at 2 million in 1932) became hobos , travelling around America, living in tents by railway tracks or in freight wagons. Some deliberately got arrested because a night in jail meant warmth, a bed and food. Reliance on charity and relief schemes escalated: America did not have unemployment benefits. It was left to towns and cities to use local taxes to organise temporary homes, food and clothing for the poor. Long queues for bread handouts were common. However, these schemes were cut back during the Great Depression because rising unemployment meant the income from local taxes fell. Many state governments went bankrupt. Hoover eventually had to lend billions of federal monies to them in 1932 to fund public works schemes. Charities and wealthy individual stepped in to organise soup kitchens and cheap meals centres. Even Al Capone gave money for a soup kitchen in Chicago. In several cities, the unemployed organised themselves into groups to support each other. Angry protests Demonstrations, by both the unemployed and employed, at the lack of action by the government turned into violence. In 1930, a rally of unemployed people became a riot as police charged the crowd. There were strikes and bitter clashes in many American cities because of starvation level wages. The biggest protest march was by the Bonus Army in 1932. The First World War veterans demanded early payment of their $1,000 war bonuses, which were not due until 1945. With their wives and children, 15,000 of them set up a camp on Anacostia Flats, Washington. Hoover accused them of being communists and ordered their removal. They were dispersed by armed troops, cavalry, tanks and tear gas on the command of General MacArthur. Two babies died and many children were injured. previous 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Page 4 of 8 next Glossary up down More Guides Life for black Americans - CCEA next Life for immigrants - CCEA next Life for Native Americans - CCEA next Prohibition - CCEA next Social change and popular entertainment - CCEA next The ‘Roaring Twenties’ - CCEA next Economic problems in the 1920s - CCEA next The Wall Street Crash, 1929 - CCEA next The Great Depression, 1929-1933 - CCEA Struggling to get your head round revision and exams? Our team of exam survivors will get you started and keep you going. Meet them here Links BBC History external-linkRevision buddiesSUBSCRIPTION external-linkGlobal grid for learning GCSE SubjectsGCSE Subjects up down Art and Design Biology (Single Science) Business Chemistry (Single Science) Combined Science Computer Science Design and Technology Digital Technology (CCEA) Drama English Language English Literature French Geography German History Home Economics: Food and Nutrition (CCEA) Hospitality (CCEA) ICT Irish – Learners (CCEA) Journalism (CCEA) Learning for Life and Work (CCEA) Mandarin Maths Maths Numeracy (WJEC) Media Studies Modern Foreign Languages Moving Image Arts (CCEA) Music Physical Education Physics (Single Science) PSHE and Citizenship Religious Studies Science Sociology Spanish Welsh Second Language (WJEC) Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.