https://www.bbc.com/news/av/entertainment-arts-34800541/nick-hornby-young-women-given-so-little-to-do-in-films
Nick Hornby: Young women given 'so little to do' in films - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts selected Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Nick Hornby: Young women given 'so little to do' in films Screenwriter Nick Hornby, who has worked with Carey Mulligan and Reese Witherspoon, has said young women are given “so little to do in the cinema” apart from parts where they "sit around at home being girlfriends". “They are given so little to do in the cinema, as a rule, that when you've written a part this size you know you're going to get access to the best talent in the world, and you can't do that with men, with an independent movie," Mr Hornby said. The author, best known for High Fidelity and About a Boy, has adapted Irish novelist Colm Tóibín's award-winning book, Brooklyn. The film, about a young Irish woman who emigrates to the city in the 1950s to find work, is in cinemas now. Colm Tóibín praised lead actress Saoirse Ronan's skill for portraying the emotions from the book. 12 Nov 2015 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/entertainment-arts-34800541/nick-hornby-young-women-given-so-little-to-do-in-films Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts selected Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.