https://www.bbc.com/food
BBC Food - Recipes and inspiration from your favourite BBC programmes and chefs Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC Food Home Recipes In Season Occasions Cuisines Dishes Collections Chefs Stories Diets Programmes Ingredients Techniques Your Favourites Healthy food for a happy family Keep the family full and happy with a top-notch meal that’s easy to prepare. collection The sweet spot Little treats no-one can resist. Choose from brownies, biscuits, muffins or scones. collection Topped with comfort There's nothing more comforting more than a potato-topped pie, whether it's meat, fish or veggie. collection Gather the gang With our simple recipes, cooking for a crowd has never been easier. collection Top stories How to eat like a queen story Mary Berry’s Christmas cake calculator story The best ever film food moments to recreate at home story Can you really do a plastic-free food shop? story See all stories (143) Try today's top recipes Spinach paneerby Baksho Ark Main course Chicken with creamy mushroom sauceby Dipa Jakhu Main course Slow cooker Bologneseby Gennaro Contaldo Main course Campfire stewby Sunil Vijayakar Main course Top stories How to eat like a queen story Mary Berry’s Christmas cake calculator story The best ever film food moments to recreate at home story Can you really do a plastic-free food shop? story See all stories (143) Recipes from programmes Rick Stein’s Secret FranceSun 17th Nov Episode 2 Saturday Kitchen Best BitesSun 17th Nov 17/11/2019 Saturday KitchenSat 16th Nov 16/11/2019 Hairy Bikers: Route 66Wed 13th Nov Episode 6 Hairy Bikers' Best of BritishTue 12th Nov Episode 14 Hairy Bikers - Chicken & EggSun 10th Nov Episode 5 In season: Mussels Mussels with poulette sauceby Rick Stein Main course The Hairy Bikers' paella by The Hairy Bikers Main course Pembrokeshire seafoodby James Martin Main course Seafood pasta with garlic breadby The Hairy Bikers Main course See all mussels recipes (140) Meet the chefs John Torode Chefs Donna Hay Chefs Andi Oliver Chefs Chris Bavin Chefs Get nutritional advice and recipes Vegan Vegan recipes bursting with flavour, plus information on vegan ingredients and substitutions and foods to watch out for. diets Low-calorie diet These recipes are for those on a 1,200 – 1,500 calorie diet. Pick and mix your favourites to keep things exciting. diets Vegetarian Vegetarian recipes bursting with flavour plus information on ingredients, substitutions and foods to watch out for. diets Gluten free Let BBC Food tempt you to more than 3000 recipes, including pancakes, bread and cakes. diets Healthy For healthy recipes that are balanced, varied and a pleasure to eat, let BBC Food show you how. diets Dairy free If you're lactose-intolerant or allergic to dairy products, BBC Food's dairy-free dishes will freshen up your repertoire diets See all diets Learn how to cook How to make parathas Easy How to cook a gammon joint Intermediate How to make scrambled eggs Easy How to brown mince Easy See all cooking techniques (169) Food across the BBC Women in farming: Why are there so few? BBC News Student forced to turn to food bank by loan delay BBC News Burger allergy death father hits out at Byron chain BBC News Twenty tonnes of salmon 'missing' after crash in Argyll BBC News FAQs about BBC Food Find us here Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.