https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46400678
India election 2019: Do more Indians than before have access to toilets? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: Do more Indians than before have access to toilets? By Saroj Singh BBC Reality Check 18 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46400678 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Reality Check Image copyright Getty Images Image caption A public toilet is installed in a village in Bihar, northern India India's BJP government has undertaken a highly ambitious project to build tens of millions of toilets across the country. The practice of defecating in open places - in fields, waste ground or in rivers - has long been blamed for the spread of disease. It also puts women's safety at risk when they go out under cover of darkness to relieve themselves. In the run-up to the Indian election, which gets under way on 11 April, BBC Reality Check is examining claims and pledges made by the main political parties. Claim: India's prime minister, Narendra Modi, says that under his Clean India programme 90% of Indians now have access to a toilet, up from 40% before he came into office in 2014. Verdict: It's true there's been a large increase in the number of household toilets built under the current government. But there's also evidence that for a variety of reasons, not all toilets are being used or are functioning properly. The Clean India programme comes in two parts: •Rural Clean India - aims to stop the practice of open defecation in villages by making toilets more accessible. •Urban Clean India - to ensure there are toilets in homes and public places and to manage solid waste disposal in cities. The available government data shows that by November 2018, 96.25% of homes had their own toilets. This is up from 38.7% in October 2014. An independent survey carried out in rural areas between November 2017 and March 2018 found that 77% of rural households had access to toilets and 93.4 % of the people who had access to a toilet used them regularly. The government's Clean India Mission says that 27 states and union territories out of 36 are now free from the practice of open defecation. But while there is plenty of data on toilet construction, there are still questions about actual usage. Having a toilet installed in a household does not always mean it will be used, or that the practice of defecating in the open has stopped. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Women's safety can be compromised by having to use open fields as toilets The government's main data-collecting body - the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) - reported that of those households getting new toilets in 2016, 5% were not being used and 3% had no connection to a water supply. The secretary for the Rural Clean India Mission, Parameswaran Iyer, has told the BBC that he believed things had improved since then. But there are a number of issues highlighted by official reports and NGO research: Many toilets have a single pit latrine or septic tank, which fills up after five to seven years, rendering it unusable. Bad construction and poor maintenance mean some toilets are non-functioning. There are also issues around targets and official data. As an example, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced in 2015 that all government schools now had separate toilets for girls and boys. But according to the Annual Status of Education Report published in 2018, nearly 23% of government school toilets were not useable. Read more from Reality Check Will India's bullet train run on time? Will India become the next manufacturing superpower? India election 2019: Is the switch to gas in the kitchen working? India election 2019: Did the ban on high-value banknotes work? No more open defecation? BBC Marathi service did its own investigation in 2018 into the official assertion that the state of Maharasthra was free of open defecation. They found that 25% of households in one village did not have access to toilets, and were having to go to the toilet in the open. Image copyright Getty Images Shortly after the BBC story was published, the local authorities provided more toilets. Other reports also throw into doubt government claims about ending open defecation. For example, the state of Gujarat was declared free of open defecation on 2 October, 2017. But almost a year later, an official audit said 29% households did not yet have toilets. Behavioural changes An important part of the government's programme is aimed at changing habits. This is harder to measure although anecdotal evidence suggests there are behavioural issues in some places. A local official in the state of Uttar Pradesh recently told the BBC: "People have constructed toilets, but still do not regard them as a part of the house. "And in many homes, older people avoid using them as they don't find them comfortable enough." A survey published in January this year looked at this issue in four northern Indian states: Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. It said that almost a quarter of people in households with latrines still defecated in the open. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on Twitter Related Topics Reality Check India India elections 2019 Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story The India girl who took her dad to the police over a toilet 12 December 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.