https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-39575854
India outrage at 1m-rupee bounty on 'demon' Mamata Banerjee - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India outrage at 1m-rupee bounty on 'demon' Mamata Banerjee 12 April 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-39575854 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Getty Images There has been outrage in India after a member of the ruling BJP party announced a bounty of 1.1m rupees ($17,018; £13,622) on West Bengal state Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's head. Yogesh Varshney issued the threat after police broke up a rally recently to celebrate Hindu god Hanuman's birthday. Mr Varshney accused the police of brutally assaulting devotees and said the action was ordered by Ms Banerjee, whom he described as a "demon". The BJP party disowned the statement. "I condemn this type of statement. The state government can take proper action against him," Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi, federal minister and a vice-president of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), said in the parliament on Wednesday. Ms Banerjee is a feisty politician who was named one of Time magazine's 100 most influential people in the world in 2012. Mr Varshney is a member of the Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha, the youth wing of the Hindu nationalist BJP. Profile: Bengal firebrand Mamata Banerjee India professor held over cartoon Banerjee makes 'influential' list Reports said the police had refused permission for Sunday's rally in Birbhum town, 180km from the state capital, Kolkata (formerly Calcutta), and forcibly broke up the procession when it tried to enter a Muslim-dominated area. Mr Varshney accused Ms Banerjee's government of targeting Hindu devotees. "Whoever comes to me with the severed head of Mamata Banerjee… I will reward him with 1.1m rupees," he said on Tuesday, describing the chief minister as a "demon". Ms Banerjee's All India Trinamool Congress Party has strongly condemned the statement and demanded Mr Varshney's arrest. Many Indians also took to Twitter to criticise the outrageous threat: Image copyright @jan14anurag Image copyright @ShreyaTeresita Related Topics India Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Mamata Banerjee makes it to Time magazine's list 19 April 2012 Bengal firebrand Mamata Banerjee 13 May 2011 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.