https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-39425862
Vector Institute is just the latest in Canada's AI expansion - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US & Canada selected US & Canada US & Canada Vector Institute is just the latest in Canada's AI expansion By Jessica Murphy BBC News, Toronto 29 March 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-39425862 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright University of Toronto Image caption Geoff Hinton is known as the "godfather of deep learning" Canadian researchers have been behind some recent major breakthroughs in artificial intelligence. Now, the country is betting on becoming a big player in one of the hottest fields in technology, with help from the likes of Google and RBC. In an unassuming building on the University of Toronto's downtown campus, Geoff Hinton laboured for years on the "lunatic fringe" of academia and artificial intelligence, pursuing research in an area of AI called neural networks. Also known as "deep learning", neural networks are computer programs that learn in a similar way to human brains. The field showed early promise in the 1980s, but the tech sector turned its attention to other AI methods after that promise seemed slow to develop. "The approaches that I thought were silly were in the ascendancy and the approach that I thought was the right approach was regarded as silly," says the British-born professor, who splits his time between the university and Google, where he is a vice-president of engineering fellow. Now, neural networks - which allow computers to do things like teach themselves to play games like Texas hold 'em - are considered tech's next big thing, and Hinton is recognised globally for his work. Neural networks perform complex and intuitive tasks through exposure to huge amounts of data. Today's more powerful computers and massive sets of data allowed for breakthroughs in neural network technology, improving accuracy in speech recognition and computer vision, which is helping make self-driving cars a reality. AI to dominate banking Elon Musk's new brain electrode firm Neural networks are used by the likes of Netflix to recommend what you should binge watch and smartphones with voice assistance tools. Google DeepMind's AlphaGo AI used them to win against a human in the ancient game of Go in 2016. Image copyright Google/Getty Images Foteini Agrafioti, who heads up the new RBC Research in Machine Learning lab at the University of Toronto, said those recent innovations made AI attractive to researchers and the tech industry. "Anything that's powering Google's engines right now is powered by deep learning," she says. Developments in the field helped jumpstart innovation and paved the way for the technology's commercialisation. They also captured the attention of Google, IBM and Microsoft, and kicked off a hiring race in the field. The renewed focus on neural networks has boosted the careers of early Canadian AI machine learning pioneers like Hinton, the University of Montreal's Yoshua Bengio, and University of Alberta's Richard Sutton. Money from big tech is coming north, along with investments by domestic corporations like banking multinational RBC and auto parts giant Magna, and millions of dollars in government funding. Toronto will soon get the Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, geared to fuelling "Canada's amazing AI momentum". The new research facility, which will be officially launched on Thursday, will be dedicated to expanding the applications of AI through explorations in deep learning and other forms of machine learning. It has received about C$170m (US$127m/£102m) in funding from the Canadian and Ontario governments and a group of 30 businesses, including Google and RBC. Hinton will be the institute's chief scientific adviser. Image copyright Thinkstock Image caption Building an artificial brain that thinks like a human is complex and experts are only just beginning to get to grips with it Former banking executive Ed Clark will head the institute, and says the goal is to make Toronto, which has the largest concentration of AI-related industries in Canada, one of the top five places in the world for AI innovation and business. The founders also want it to serve as a magnet and retention tool for top talent aggressively head-hunted by US firms. Clark says they want to "wake up" Canadian industry to the possibilities of AI, which is expected to have a massive impact on fields like healthcare, banking, manufacturing and transportation. The Vector Institute is just the latest infusion of cash into Canada's AI sector. Google invested C$4.5m (US$3.4m/£2.7m) last November in the University of Montreal's Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms. Microsoft is funding a Montreal startup, Element AI. The Seattle-based company also announced it would acquire Montreal-based Maluuba and help fund AI research at the University of Montreal and McGill University. Thomson Reuters and General Motors both recently moved AI labs to Toronto. Earlier this month, the federal government announced C$125m ($94m/£75m) for a "pan-Canadian AI strategy". RBC is also investing in the future of AI in Canada, including opening a machine learning lab headed by Agrafioti, co-funding a program to bring global AI talent and entrepreneurs to Toronto, and collaborating with Sutton and the University of Alberta's Machine Intelligence Institute. Those trying to build Canada's AI scene admit places like Silicon Valley will always be attractive to tech talent. But they hope strategic investments like these will allow Canada to fuel the growth of domestic startups. Canadian tech also sees the travel uncertainty created by the Trump administration in the US as making Canada more attractive to foreign talent. (One of Clark's selling points is that Toronto as an "open and diverse" city). "I would hate to see one more professor moving south," Agrafioti says. "Really, I hope that five years from now we look back and say we almost lost it but we caught it in time and reversed it." Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionThe robots will learn from their environment, each other - and us Related Topics Canada Artificial intelligence Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story AI to dominate banking, says report 28 March 2017 Elon Musk creates Neuralink brain electrode firm 28 March 2017 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US & Canada Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.