https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-17766153
Mamata Banerjee makes it to Time magazine's list - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Mamata Banerjee makes it to Time magazine's list 19 April 2012 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-17766153 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image caption Mamata Banerjee is a street-fighting politician Chief minister of India's West Bengal state Mamata Banerjee has been named one of Time magazine's 100 most influential people in the world . The magazine described Ms Banerjee, 57, as a "consummate politician" and her party as a "feisty rabble". Ms Banerjee came to power in 2011, bringing to an end the state's 34-year communist rule. Her government has attracted a lot of negative publicity recently for cracking down on its critics. Time magazine said Ms Banerjee "spent years struggling on the margins, her Trinamool Congress Party a feisty rabble compared with the leviathan of West Bengal's communists". "Referred to by her supporters as Didi, or 'elder sister', she was labelled by critics as a mercurial oddball and a shrieking street fighter." The magazine said Ms Banerjee's "lower-middle-class background was no obstacle in a country notorious for its dynasties". "In Delhi's back rooms, where political horse trading is the name of the game, she excelled. On the streets, she out-Marxed the Marxists. "And as chief minister of her home state, she has emerged as a populist woman of action - strident and divisive but poised to play an even greater role in the world's largest democracy," the magazine said. The only other Indian on the list is health campaigner Anjali Gopalan. "Through her work at the Naz Foundation, she has done more than anyone else to advance the rights of gays and the transgendered in India, successfully petitioning the courts to get rid of a British-era law against sodomy," the magazine wrote. The list also includes US President Barack Obama, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, businessman Warren Buffett, Apple CEO Tim Cook, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, IMF chief Christine Lagarde, Duchess of Cambridge Kate Middleton and her sister, Pippa Middleton. Pakistan's first Oscar-winner filmmaker Sharmeen Obaid Chinoy and Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Chaudhry also figure on the list. Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Nehru coat 'a fashion statement' 13 January 2012 Lagaan in top sports films list 26 September 2011 Bastion of Indian communism crumbles 17 May 2009 Mamata Banerjee's Bengal comeback 11 May 2009 Related Internet links Trinamool Congress The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.