https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-45939552
Student granted UK visa after media uproar - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say World selected Africa Asia Australia Europe selected Latin America Middle East Europe Europe Student granted UK visa after media uproar By Anna Holligan BBC News, Amsterdam 22 October 2018 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-45939552 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Brexit Image copyright Nadza Dzinalija Image caption Nadza Dzinalija said she was sure her visa had been approved because of media coverage The UK has granted a visa to a student for an academic conference after a media storm over what lawyers said was a "far-fetched" and "absurd" case. Two Amsterdam University students – originally from Bosnia and Turkey - had their applications rejected. One submitted parts of his paperwork late and the other's student visa is due to expire in December. Immigration officials feared they would not return home after the event - despite the students' return flights. One student abandoned his effort to travel but the other, Nadza Dzinalija, told the BBC she was delighted the UK Home Office had overturned its decision. "I'm really excited I can go. I'm sure it's because of the media attention," she said. "They called me earlier and asked for more information and then I was told I could go to immigration service and have my passport stamped today." The students were among 29 preparing to attend a gathering organised by Glasgow University's psychology department. Ms Dzinalija, 21, had been worried the UK rejection would stay on her file, acting like a black mark for future visa applications. 'Arrogant' view Jan Doerfel is a London-based barrister who has taken on her case free of charge. "It's assumed she'd rather live in a hostile environment without status rather than continue life in a country she has invested in in terms of her education," he said. "The idea that the UK is the promised land is just an arrogant and ignorant attitude. "They ignored the fact she has travelled extensively to Australia and within the Schengen area and has always complied with any immigration restrictions." 1,600 skilled workers denied UK visas Britain's work permits force hard labour UK 'missing out' on overseas students One of the UK's most high profile QCs, Philippe Sands, professor of international law at University College London (UCL), told the BBC he now regularly organises meetings outside the UK to avoid these situations. "Problems with visas are a regular occurrence. Its partly due to government policy, and partly to the outsourcing to private companies of the processing of visas. For several years I have been unable to invite certain individuals - distinguished professors, international civil servants - to speak in my classes at UCL, or attend conferences in the UK. "I now often organise meetings outside the UK to avoid visa difficulties. This is both for academic meetings and for professional activities as a barrister. Britain is now known around the world as a country that does not wish certain foreigners to visit. Its sad, it's appalling, and its discriminatory." 'Trying to close borders' Some people on Twitter have mocked the idea that anyone would want to swap life in the Netherlands for the UK. Image Copyright @nstaylor601 @nstaylor601 Report Image Copyright @nstaylor601 @nstaylor601 Report Many academics are concerned this case is part of a worrying trend, which some suspect is linked to Brexit. "My feeling is that it's the wider issue that there's a suspicion that everyone who comes to the UK is desperate to stay." Niamh Stack, Professor of Psychology at Glasgow University, told the BBC. "This isn't an isolated case. It's generally the UK trying to close its borders. We need open borders to improve science, the exchange of ideas. At a time when the discipline is trying to open up and move forward Britain is doing the opposite." A spokesperson for the Home Office told the BBC: "All visa applications are considered in line with the immigration rules and on the basis of the evidence provided." Related Topics UK immigration Amsterdam University of Glasgow Brexit Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story 1,600 IT workers and engineers denied UK visas 16 May 2018 UK visas: High-skilled migrants cap 'should be scrapped' 18 September 2018 Britain's work permits force hard labour 8 May 2018 UK immigration: No preference for EU workers after Brexit, cabinet agrees 25 September 2018 UK 'missing out' on overseas students 4 September 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Prince Andrew stands by 'car-crash' interview 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation World Sections Africa Asia Australia Europe selected Latin America Middle East Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe selected Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.