https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-50419668
Trump impeachment inquiry: Why Ukraine is so important to the US - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say World selected Africa Asia Australia Europe selected Latin America Middle East Europe Europe Trump impeachment inquiry: Why Ukraine is so important to the US By Jonah Fisher BBC Kyiv correspondent 15 November 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-50419668 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Trump impeachment inquiry Image copyright Getty Images Did President Donald Trump withhold military aid from ally Ukraine for his own political reasons? That is the big question at the heart of the Democrat-led impeachment inquiry. Ukraine is not in Nato and it has struggled with years of corruption. But its future direction is of geopolitical importance. Why does Ukraine matter to US? For much of its 28-year independent history it has been unclear whether Ukraine would end up aligned with Russia or the West. In 2014, that uncertainty appeared to come to an end. After a bloody street revolution, Ukraine's new leaders asserted that the country's future lay with closer association with Europe and the West. Russia was now seen as the enemy and it responded by seizing Crimea and supporting an armed uprising in eastern Ukraine that has so far cost more than 13,000 lives. Timeline: How Ukraine story unfolded Under the US Obama administration, Ukrainians' right to decide their own future, and to resist Russian aggression, was defended as an important ideological principle. That changed when President Trump took office, and Ukraine's government has not been able to rely on America's active support in the same way since. How much military aid does the US give? The US has a longstanding relationship with the Ukrainian military and has committed about $1.5bn (£1.2bn; €1.4bn) in aid since 2014. Much of that has been spent training soldiers and in efforts to modernise the dated way the Ukrainian army is organised and operates. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption A US-supplied Javelin anti-tank missile system is tested by Ukrainian military at an undisclosed site The latest tranche of assistance, which was held up and then released by the Trump administration, is worth $391m and includes a range of weapons and technical assistance. How important is US military aid and support to Ukraine? It is important on both a military and symbolic level. Where once the Ukrainian military knew that the US had their backs, this can no longer be taken for granted. The wavering over assistance, and President Trump's frequent derogatory words about Ukraine, will almost certainly have strengthened Moscow's hand in peace negotiations. How is Ukraine linked to Trump impeachment inquiry? The impeachment inquiry touches on the 2016 US presidential election campaign and also President Trump's possible opponent in 2020 - Joe Biden. Ukraine is involved in both. What Trump's Ukraine phone call really means Trump impeachment: Who's who in Ukraine story? So far no Ukrainian has been called to testify. The inquiry is instead focusing on the official and "irregular" US channels of communication between Washington and Kyiv. Why does the 2016 election keep coming up? President Trump's lukewarm attitude towards Ukraine dates back to the election campaign of 2016. At the time, Mr Trump's campaign manager - Paul Manafort - was forced to resign after documents emerged in Ukraine that suggested he had received off-the-books payments from a pro-Russian political party. President Trump and his supporters say that by releasing the documents, Ukrainian officials unfairly interfered to support his Democrat opponent Hillary Clinton. Despite the best efforts of President Trump's lawyer Rudy Giuliani, the evidence to support the claims remains extremely thin. Meanwhile, Mr Manafort has been jailed for financial crimes. What about the Bidens? This has turned into the central part of the impeachment inquiry with both parties approaching from a different angle. It concerns a period in 2014-15 when Vice-President Biden was the Obama administration's point-man on Ukraine. At the same time his son, Hunter, had a lucrative directorship with a Ukrainian gas company. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionWhat we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims Democrats are seeking to prove that President Trump leveraged US military assistance and a White House visit in return for Ukraine's president launching an investigation into the Bidens. Republicans are trying to make this about the Bidens. They want to know why Hunter was paid so much, and whether the vice-president used his political clout to help his son's company. What is the Ukrainian government saying about it? Ukraine's initial response through President Volodymyr Zelensky was to say that he had felt "no pressure" from the White House to launch an investigation into the Bidens. It has become part of President Trump's mantra when he riffs about his "perfect" 25 July phone call with his Ukrainian counterpart. Since then, testimony and text messages released by US diplomats have made it clear that Ukrainian officials were confused and worried about the hold-up in US assistance. And that they were being told the way out was to announce investigations into both the 2016 election and the Bidens. Trump's man in Brussels in eye of the storm We now know, for example, that the Ukrainians were actively considering capitulating and doing a TV interview that would announce the investigations that President Trump clearly wanted. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionTrump impeachment: Was there quid pro quo? Mindful of getting further sucked into partisan US politics the Ukrainian officials involved are declining to give their side of the story. What do Ukrainians think? For the most part they've moved on. Ukrainians are more preoccupied by their new president's efforts to bring peace in the east than his phone call with Trump. President Zelensky has recently made a series of concessions in the hope of getting Russia to the negotiating table. His critics are accusing him of naivety and capitulating to President Vladimir Putin. Related Topics Russia Gordon Sondland Donald Trump United States Trump impeachment inquiry Kyiv Ukraine Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Impeachment: How an overheard phone call could damage Trump 13 November 2019 Video Biden and Ukraine: What we know about corruption claims 26 September 2019 Trump impeachment: Who's who in Ukraine story? 7 November 2019 Gordon Sondland: Trump’s man in Brussels in eye of the storm 10 November 2019 Timeline of Trump-Ukraine story 13 November 2019 Video Trump's Ukraine call: Did president ask for 'a favour' in return for aid? 26 September 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation World Sections Africa Asia Australia Europe selected Latin America Middle East Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe selected Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.