https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-politics-42190271/should-donald-trump-s-state-visit-be-called-off
Should Donald Trump's state visit be called off? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK selected Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Politics selected Parliaments Brexit Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Should Donald Trump's state visit be called off? US President Donald Trump has caused quite some furore over his tweets. After retweeting right-wing Islamophobic videos, he told Theresa May to focus on what he called was Britain's "destructive Radical Islamic Terrorism." It has led to calls for the president's state visit to be called off. The BBC's deputy political editor John Pienaar explains why that could have led to "full blown diplomatic crisis". 30 Nov 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-politics-42190271/should-donald-trump-s-state-visit-be-called-off Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Politics Sections Politics Parliaments Brexit Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK selected UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 selected Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.