https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-43972155
India cities dominate world air pollution list - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India cities dominate world air pollution list 2 May 2018 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-43972155 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright AFP Image caption Children are among the worst affected by air pollution Fourteen Indian cities are among the world's 20 most polluted, according to World Health Organization (WHO) data. BBC analysis of the study shows the northern city of Kanpur tops the list of world cities with the highest PM2.5 levels in 2016. PM2.5 are tiny but deadly air particles, which can increase the likelihood of respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. Air pollution caused 4.2 million deaths globally in 2016, the study said. Kanpur's average PM2.5 level in the same year was 173, which is 17 times higher than the WHO's safe limit. Delhi's air pollution is triggering a health crisis India air index: In world's most polluted city, Delhi Reality Check: Is Beijing's air quality better this winter? India's capital, Delhi, is in sixth spot with average PM2.5 levels recorded at 143. The study added that nine out of 10 people in the world breathe polluted air. Around 3.8 million people died in 2016 due to pollution "from cooking with polluting fuels and technologies", it said. "It is unacceptable that over 3 billion people - most of them women and children - are still breathing deadly smoke every day from using polluting stoves and fuels in their homes. If we don't take urgent action on air pollution, we will never come close to achieving sustainable development," said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of WHO. India has seen rapid development in the past two decades, but it has come at the cost of increasing pollution. Weak industrial regulation means that factories do not follow pollution-control measures. Rapid construction has also contributed to high levels of PM2.5. Last year, a public health emergency was declared in Delhi as pollution levels crossed 70 times the safe limit. Several Chinese cities were also listed in the report as highly polluted but the data for those places was four or five years old. Maria Neira, WHO's head of public health, said India should follow the example of China, which had made big improvements in air quality. "There is a big step at the government level [in China] declaring war on air pollution," Ms Neira said. "One of the reasons for that is that the health argument was very strongly presented, and the fact that the citizens were really breathing air that was totally unacceptable. "We would be very happy if we would see a similar movement now in India which is one of the countries for which we are particularly concerned." Related Topics Air pollution Environment India Pollution Delhi Asia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Video India air index: In world's most polluted city, Delhi 6 April 2015 Delhi's air pollution is triggering a health crisis 12 November 2017 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.