https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49231619
Article 370: India strips disputed Kashmir of special status - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Article 370: India strips disputed Kashmir of special status 5 August 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-49231619 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Kashmir tensions Image copyright AFP Image caption India has deployed tens of thousands of troops to Indian-administered Kashmir in recent days India's government has revoked part of the constitution that gives Indian-administered Kashmir special status, prompting fears of unrest. Article 370 is sensitive because it guarantees significant autonomy for the Muslim-majority state. The measure was accompanied by a telecoms and media blackout which began on Sunday evening. There is a long-running insurgency on the Indian side. India and Pakistan fought several conflicts over Kashmir. For many Kashmiris, Article 370 was the main justification for being a part of India and by revoking it, the BJP has irrevocably changed Delhi's relationship with the region, the BBC's Geeta Pandey reports from Delhi. Meanwhile India's parliament is expected to pass a bill splitting Indian-administered Kashmir into two territories governed directly by Delhi. Pakistan condemned India's decision to revoke the special status of its part of Kashmir as illegal, saying it would "exercise all possible options" to counter it. "India is playing a dangerous game which will have serious consequences for regional peace and stability," said Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi. Why India and Pakistan dispute Kashmir Why a special law on Kashmir is controversial Modi's Kashmir move will fuel resentment 'India has betrayed Kashmir' But an Indian government source said there was no external implication as the Line of Control, the de facto border, and boundaries of Kashmir had not been altered. Why are there tensions over Kashmir? During the partition of the Indian subcontinent in 1947, some expected Jammu and Kashmir, like other Muslim-majority regions, to go to Pakistan. But the ruler of the princely state, who had initially wanted Jammu and Kashmir to become independent, joined India in return for help against an invasion of tribesmen from Pakistan. War broke out between India and Pakistan, and Kashmir effectively became partitioned. The region, which remains one of the most militarised zones in the world, has been a flashpoint between India and Pakistan for more than six decades. Atmosphere of fear By Aamir Peerzada, BBC News, Srinagar By the time we woke up this morning, the internet was gone and we now have no mobile connectivity. If people step out of their homes, they see paramilitary forces on every street. Almost every major road is shut - we are hearing that more troops are being deployed. No-one knows what is happening in other parts of the state - we can't talk to anyone else. People are concerned - they don't know what is happening, they don't know what is going to happen. It's an atmosphere of fear. People are scared to come out, they have stockpiled food for months. Kashmiris have always been willing to defend the state's special status. It looks like a long road ahead, and no-one knows what's next. What is Article 370? In 1949, a special provision was added to India's constitution providing autonomy to Jammu and Kashmir. Article 370 allows the state to have its own constitution, a separate flag and independence over all matters except foreign affairs, defence and communications. Another provision later added under Article 370 - 35A - gives special privileges to permanent residents, including state government jobs and the exclusive right to own property in the state. It is seen as protecting the state's distinct demographic character as the only Muslim-majority state in India. So why is India's move controversial? The move by the Hindu nationalist BJP government prompted outrage in parliament, and some legal experts have called it an attack on the constitution. Critics fear the move is designed to change the demographic make-up of India-administered Kashmir - by giving people from the rest of the country to right to acquire property and settle there permanently. The state's former chief minister, Mehbooba Mufti, told the BBC she felt there was a "sinister design" to the decision. "They just want to occupy our land and want to make this Muslim-majority state like any other state and reduce us to a minority and disempower us totally." Why is the government doing this? The ruling BJP made revoking Article 370 part of the party's 2019 election manifesto - and it won a landslide victory earlier this year. It has argued that Article 370 has prevented the region's development and its integration with India. Image copyright Reuters Image caption Supporters of India's ruling BJP have been celebrating the move An Indian government source told journalists the region's special status had discouraged outside investment and affected its economy, while terrorism and smuggling were rife. "A set of anachronistic provisions were not allowing the progress of Kashmir," the source said. "The huge sum of money and resources which were going into the state were not being optimised." How did the government make the change? India's government announced a presidential order revoking all of Article 370 apart from one clause which says that the state is an integral part of India. The order was met by massive protests from the opposition - but has now been signed into law by President Ram Nath Kovind. Prior to the announcement, a telecoms and media blackout began on Sunday evening in the region. The government explained the move as being aimed at pre-empting any violence that the announcement might trigger. Officials said the restrictions would not be in place for long. Image copyright Reuters Image caption Opponents of the move have also been out in the streets of Delhi Parliament is also expected to approve a measure dividing the state into two regions ruled by the central government. One region will combine Muslim-majority Kashmir and Hindu-majority Jammu. The other is Buddhist-majority Ladakh, which is culturally and historically close to Tibet. The forgotten victims of the world's highest war The funerals driving youth to militancy What has been happening in Kashmir? Indian-administered Kashmir is in a state of lockdown. Curfew-like conditions have been imposed, and orders preventing the assembly of more than four people have been introduced. Tens of thousands of Indian troops were deployed to the region ahead of Monday's announcement and tourists were told to leave under warnings of a terror threat. Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionIn December Yogita Limaye examined why there had been a rise in violence in Kashmir In the hours before Monday's announcement, two of the state's former chief ministers - Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti - were placed under house arrest. Related Topics Article 370 of the Constitution of India Kashmir India India-Pakistan relations Kashmir tensions Asia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Article 370: Former chief minister says India has betrayed Kashmir 5 August 2019 Kashmir: Why India and Pakistan fight over it 8 August 2019 Article 35A: Why a special law on Kashmir is controversial 5 August 2019 The funerals driving Indian Kashmir youth to militancy 14 May 2018 Kargil: The forgotten victims of the world's highest war 26 July 2019 Article 370: India's move on Kashmir will fuel resentment 5 August 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.