https://www.bbc.com/
BBC - Homepage Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC BBC Homepage Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. China Police surround HK campus after night of violence Protesters arm themselves at Hong Kong campus China Protesters arm themselves at Hong Kong campus Why office noise drives you mad Worklife Why office noise drives you mad The world’s most heart-unhealthy food? Travel The world’s most heart-unhealthy food? Police tear gas met with petrol bombs Asia Police tear gas met with petrol bombs News 'They had shot the boys in the head' British Special Forces have been accused of covering up the killings of four young Afghans in 2012. UK 'They had shot the boys in the head' Woman who inherited fatal disease sues NHS A woman is suing the NHS for not revealing her father's Huntington's disease before she had a child. Health Woman who inherited fatal disease sues NHS Food and fuel shortages hit Bolivia amid crisis The interim government says it has flown supplies into La Paz to avoid protesters' road blocks. Latin America & Caribbean Food and fuel shortages hit Bolivia amid crisis Sport England 'further ahead' than in 2018 Gareth Southgate says his England side are "further ahead" than they were at the corresponding stage of qualifying for the 2018 World Cup. Football England 'further ahead' than in 2018 Tsitsipas wins ATP Finals title A nerveless Stefanos Tsitsipas comes from a set down to beat Dominic Thiem and become the youngest winner of the ATP Finals in 18 years. Tennis Tsitsipas wins ATP Finals title Verstappen wins in Brazil as Ferraris collide Both Ferraris collide and retire as Max Verstappen overtakes Lewis Hamilton twice to win thrilling Brazilian GP. Formula 1 Verstappen wins in Brazil as Ferraris collide London Weather Edit Mon 9°C 0°C Tue 7°C 5°C Wed 8°C 5°C Thu 10°C 7°C Visit Reel The new home for amazing BBC video content The humble rock that changed tech forever The scandal that rocked the scientific world The 'sex tapes' of the most deepfaked woman in the world Canada Canada refuses visas to African AI researchers Visa hassles made another AI conference move to Ethiopia, rather than deal with Canadian officials Canada Canada refuses visas to African AI researchers Great Britain to face Canada in warm-up Great Britain are to face world number one side Canada in a World Championships warm-up game in May Ice hockey Great Britain to face Canada in warm-up Paralysed hockey player moves leg after surgery Ryan Straschnitzki was injured in the deadly April 2018 Humboldt Broncos bus crash Canada Paralysed hockey player moves leg after surgery Cirque du Soleil founder held for growing cannabis Guy Laliberte's company says the plant is grown on his island in the South Pacific for personal use Asia Cirque du Soleil founder held for growing cannabis Editor’s Picks A dramatic fire-seared delicacy In one of the country’s least-visited prefectures, chefs sear bonito over towering flames. Japan 2020 A dramatic fire-seared delicacy 'Dopamine fasting': Tech's latest fad No tech, food or eye contact: Can a ‘dopamine fast’ make life feel better? Worklife 'Dopamine fasting': Tech's latest fad We need to talk about vaginas How artists are reshaping the conversation around female genitalia Culture We need to talk about vaginas The toxic killers too small to see Nanoparticles are causing a pollution crisis Future The toxic killers too small to see The animal resistant to cancer “They’re the secret to save our city, our country and probably the world” Travel The animal resistant to cancer Vegetarian dishes perfect for winter nights Try out recipes for special dinners without going overboard Food Vegetarian dishes perfect for winter nights How the pain of grief can spur success Can the experience of losing a parent in childhood help set someone up for success later in life? Ideas How the pain of grief can spur success Latest Business News 1 Saudi Aramco flotation values oil giant at $1.7tn 2 Party leaders make election pitches to business 3 Why tech giants are putting billions into housing 4 Prison and liberator: The paradox of Uber Made on Earth Future The humble mineral that transformed the world The humble mineral that transformed the world ADVERTISEMENT Technology of Business Business The £7,500 dress that does not exist The £7,500 dress that does not exist Featured video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Figgy is Mexican-American but he can't speak Spanish - he explains why that matters. US & Canada 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Recommended Most Watched Latest 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' US & Canada 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' 'I feel confident, vulnerable, empowered' Norfolk 'I feel confident, vulnerable, empowered' The women car fans taking on the 'boy racer'... Kent The women car fans taking on the 'boy racer' image Helping coal miners to save the planet Magazine Helping coal miners to save the planet Prince Andrew 'was home with the children' UK Prince Andrew 'was home with the children' Ready for the total solar eclipse? US & Canada Ready for the total solar eclipse? Great Mosque of al-Nuri destroyed Middle East Great Mosque of al-Nuri destroyed Video 'shows Mosul mosque's destruction' Middle East Video 'shows Mosul mosque's destruction' The rise of the female fitness model England The rise of the female fitness model Car burglar caught with his pants down US & Canada Car burglar caught with his pants down ICYMI: Stylish pig that could help you fly World ICYMI: Stylish pig that could help you fly My removal helped 'shady interests' -... US & Canada My removal helped 'shady interests' - Yovanovitch BBC America BBC America becomes Wonderstruck Every Saturday starting November 2, BBC America becomes your destination for wildlife and wonder BBC America becomes Wonderstruck Schedule Channel Finder BBC World News Click: Life-like androids and other news Paul Carter looks at some of the week's best technology stories Click: Life-like androids and other news Schedule Channel Finder BBC BritBox We invite you to try BritBox The streaming service from the BBC and ITV is the biggest collection of British TV in one place. We invite you to try BritBox Start your free trial Sign in More BBC channels BBC Canada Cbeebies BBC Kids BBC World Service On Air: CrowdScience More around the BBC Robyn Crawford opens up about relationship with Whitney Houston "It was love and it was open and it was honest," the star's former assistant tells the BBC. Entertainment & Arts Robyn Crawford opens up about relationship with Whitney Houston Xbox chief: Years before streaming goes mainstream Technology Xbox chief: Years before streaming goes mainstream 'Worrying' rise in severe allergies in children Health 'Worrying' rise in severe allergies in children Bloodhound land speed racer blasts to 628mph Science & Environment Bloodhound land speed racer blasts to 628mph Children In Need 2019 appeal raises £47.9m Entertainment & Arts Children In Need 2019 appeal raises £47.9m 'I spend 250 days a year away from home' Business 'I spend 250 days a year away from home' Hong Kong: 'I was tear gassed getting my lunch' Business Hong Kong: 'I was tear gassed getting my lunch' From Our Correspondents How a Trump tweet shook impeachment hearing By Anthony Zurcher Climate signal links global floods and fires By Matt McGrath Hospital waiting times at worst-ever level By Nick Triggle How an overheard phone call could damage Trump By Anthony Zurcher The undoing of India's oldest right-wing alliance By Soutik Biswas What do NHS pledges mean for Scotland? By Douglas Fraser Secrets of the largest ape that ever lived By Helen Briggs Bolivia conflict fills political vacuum after Morales By Katy Watson Ultimate Japan The festival of ‘eight million’ gods Reel The festival of ‘eight million’ gods Ultimate Japan The garden of six qualities Reel The garden of six qualities World in pictures Venice mayor blames record flood on climate change Europe Venice mayor blames record flood on climate change Comedy Wildlife Awards: The winning image Newsbeat Comedy Wildlife Awards: The winning image Sikhs celebrate their founder's 550th birthday Asia Sikhs celebrate their founder's 550th birthday Rediscovered archive reveals 1950s African chic Africa Rediscovered archive reveals 1950s African chic In pictures: Rain floods parts of northern England In Pictures In pictures: Rain floods parts of northern England BBC in other languages Persian ???? ?? ???? ?? ?????? ???? ??? ?????? ?????? ????? ?? ?????? ?????? ???????? ???????? ?????? ? ?????? ???? Spanish El "ajuste de cuentas" en Bolivia contra Evo Morales, sus colaboradores y sus seguidores Urdu ????? ???????? ?? ?? ????? ?? ???? ???? ????? ??? Vietnamese C?nh sát bao vây ??i h?c Hong Kong sau m?t ?êm b?o l?c More Languages Arabic ???? Azeri AZ?RBAYCAN Bangla ????? Burmese ?????? Chinese ??? French AFRIQUE Hausa HAUSA Hindi ?????? Indonesian INDONESIA Japanese ??? Kinyarwanda GAHUZA Kirundi KIRUNDI Kyrgyz ?????? Marathi ????? Nepali ?????? Pashto ???? Persian ????? Portuguese BRASIL Russian ?? ??????? Sinhala ????? Somali SOMALI Spanish MUNDO Swahili SWAHILI Tamil ????? Turkish TÜRKÇE Ukrainian ?????????A Urdu ???? Uzbek O'ZBEK Vietnamese TI?NG VI?T Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.