https://www.bbc.com/news/av/magazine-41348187/life-after-life-they-wanted-me-to-die-in-prison
Life after life: 'They wanted me to die in prison' - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Life after life: 'They wanted me to die in prison' At 15, Norman Bryant couldn't get married or buy a beer - but he could be locked up for the rest of his life. In many American states until recently, under-18s convicted of murder were automatically given whole-life sentences. But the US Supreme Court has now banned those mandatory sentences for juveniles, and the approximately 2,000 people who were given them have a chance of being freed. Many of those whose relatives were killed by "juvenile lifers" see their possible release as a slap in the face and an unwelcome reminder of painful memories. In April 2017, after over 30 years behind bars, Norman Bryant walked into the outside world for the first time as an adult. But how do you adjust to a society that's moved on without you? Watch more Life Stories. Listen to Life After Life on the BBC World Service. Produced by Colm O'Molloy and Elizabeth Davies. Life after Life can be seen on BBC World News at varying times on Saturday 14 October and Sunday 15 October. 30 Sep 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/magazine-41348187/life-after-life-they-wanted-me-to-die-in-prison Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.