https://www.bbc.com/reel/video/p07gc85k/is-this-the-world-s-oldest-novel-
Is this the world's oldest novel? - BBC Reel Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. PlaylistsHome Is this the world's oldest novel? 09 July 2019 |Culture BBC Reel Playlist 33 videos 123:49 Hidden Histories Delving into the mysteries of the past to shed light on the present. NOW WATCHING Culture Is this the world's oldest novel? The Tale of Genji is a Japanese novel written a thousand years ago by female author Murasaki Shikibu. Now Playing NEXT UPHistory The temple that emerged from the waters The ruins of Wat Nong Bua Yai, a temple in Thailand, reemerged due to a drought after 20 years under water. Watch now History The female warrior that history forgot Dandara was a fierce warrior who defended a kingdom of freed slaves - so why has history forgotten her? Watch now History The river of a thousand secrets Under the noses of millions of Londoners lies a huge archaeological site. Watch now History Sintra's mysterious 'inverted tower' Steeped in mysterious symbology, Quinta da Regaleira's 'inverted tower' celebrates Portugal's Templar past. Watch now History Japan's mysterious 'keyhole' tombs Who's really buried in these intriguing monuments? Watch now History Why did an entire civilisation vanish? What made the Harappan civilisation leave their cities for the Himalayas? Watch now History The dislodged 101-year-old ship Officials are watching the vessel which moved closer to the edge last week. Watch now History Shining light on 2,000-year-old secrets Scientists are using light brighter than the Sun to decipher scrolls buried when Mount Vesuvius erupted in AD79. Watch now History Uncovering an ancient Greek city Archaeologists continue their quest to unearth an ancient Messinian city. Watch now History London's only lighthouse In the heart of London, on the banks of the River Thames, is a landmark that very few know even exists. Watch now Nature The secret of the oldest lake in Europe Two families have been guarding Europe's oldest lake's secret for generations Watch now History Inside an abandoned Soviet base Take a look inside Wünsdorf, a complex near Berlin that housed tens of thousands of Soviet troops. Watch now History An ingenious way to escape the Nazis Inside Lyon’s extensive network of narrow passageways that helped Resistance fighters evade the Nazis Watch now History Cambodia’s buried temples Architect and sculptor Dy Proeung buried his life’s work to preserve it, and save his life. Watch now Remote Places The tiny Russian village of the dead Why is the village of Dargavs in Russia also known as the 'City of the Dead'? Watch now Photography Unlocking secrets from old camera film The Rescued Film Project aims to develop all the world's unprocessed camera film. Watch now Food The history of the British cup of tea How a Portuguese queen established one of the most iconic British traditions. Watch now History The secret lab where Nazis hid gold A secret laboratory 800m below the Pyrenees. Watch now History Uncovering secrets in Sudan's pyramids Pearce Paul Creasman, an underwater archaeologist, explores the murky depths of Sudan's pyramids. Watch now History The hunt for a famous lost author The story of how the chance find of a bracelet in the sea helped solve a decades-old hunt for a missing author. Watch now History The ship lost for more than 300 years The Vasa set sail in 1628 and sank after two hours. It lay under the sea until 1961. Watch now History The 'lost' weapon buried for 100 years How does a massive military cannon go missing for almost 100 years? Watch now History How Notre-Dame has always survived The 850-year-old cathedral has stood the test of time from the French Revolution to World War Two. Watch now Italy’s secret ‘ghost town’ hotels It’s a tourism model that relies on staying hidden. Watch now History The island uncovering a hidden past Orkney has a rich archaeological heritage, but it's eroding into the sea. Watch now History The ancient symbols hidden in a cave The Wemyss Caves in Scotland house the mysterious ancient Pictish carvings. Watch now The other Great Wall no-one knows It took 350 million bricks to build. Watch now Art Is this the real face of Elizabeth I? Artist Mat Collishaw attempts to unmask this famously image-conscious monarch. Watch now Art Secrets of Girl with a Pearl Earring Can new research unlock its mysteries? Watch now Art Uncovering the hidden colour of history How black-and-white photos are being brought back to life. Watch now History The slave ship hidden for 200 years It lies beneath the waves of one of the world’s most popular beaches. Watch now Design The man who built his own castle None of his teachers believed he could do it. Watch now Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.