https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-50383334
Ryan Straschnitzki: Paralysed hockey player moves his leg after surgery - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US & Canada selected US & Canada US & Canada Ryan Straschnitzki: Paralysed hockey player moves his leg after surgery 14 November 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-50383334 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright NHL via Getty Images Image caption New surgery could possibly allow Ryan Straschnitzki to stand on his own A former Humboldt Broncos ice hockey player's life changed forever when his team bus collided with a lorry, leaving him paralysed from the chest down. The BBC spoke to the young athlete shortly after he underwent spinal surgery. In a video posted by Ryan Straschnitzki's father Tom on social media, the 20-year-old is seen slowly moving his legs with the help of a therapist just days after undergoing epidural stimulator surgery. At the end of the clip, the young athlete's expression switches from intense concentration and a grin washes over his face. He says when he watches the video he notices how happy he is in that moment. "It was a crazy feeling," he told the BBC OS programme. "I obviously didn't feel [the movement] but...I was able to control it on my own." Mr Straschnitzki and his family have allowed Canadians into their lives since the horrific crash on 6 April 2018 on a rural road in the province of Saskatchewan. Ten of his teammates, aged between 16 and 21, were killed along with six others, including members of the junior hockey team's staff and the bus driver. Another 13 were injured, most like Mr Straschnitzki seriously. The tragedy shook the small community of Humboldt, where the team was based. But people from across Canada and over 80 countries rallied around the victims and their families, raising over C$15m ($11m;£8.8m) in funds. The Straschnitzkis have been open with the media about the tragedy, letting them document their son's challenges, and later his triumphs as he returned to the ice as a sledge hockey player, an adaptation of the sport designed for players who have a physical disability. The latest milestone - his surgery in a clinic in Bangkok, Thailand in early November. The procedure is still relatively new and not available in Canada. Skip Twitter post by @strazsr Mapping of the device begins.Learning to control legs. One time almost kicked therapist. Opps Therapist is only holding his leg. Ryan is moving it. Then Ryan asks if he can go work out at the Mall Gym after. The stunned therapist said NO. You just had surgery. Seriously son. Haha pic.twitter.com/QTKqfq3AEf — Strazsr (@strazsr) November 6, 2019 Report End of Twitter post by @strazsr The treatment is no miracle cure, but it is considered a breakthrough procedure that, combined with intense physical therapy, could improve the health and quality of the life of those with spinal cord injuries. Spinal shocks revive paralysed legs Spinal implant 'truly changed my life' It can potentially allow those with paralysis to recover some function, giving them the ability to stand on their own and have some independent movement. It can also increased muscle mass and strength in affected parts of the body. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Canada plays during the Paralympic Games - it's a dream of Ryan Straschnitzki's to play in Olympics The procedure involves implanting a device in the spinal cord that sends electrical currents that connect nerve signals from the brain to spinal cord tissue. Researched published in the New England Journal of Medicine last year documented two patients who regained a limited ability to walk with the use of a walker, though not all the patients in the study achieved that result. LISTEN: BBC OS speaks with Ryan Straschnitzki Mr Straschnitzki says he now has the ability to control his core, has better sitting balance and limited leg movement. A video posted online by his father on 11 November showed him moving his right leg at the knee without help. "Essentially it's supposed to rewire the nervous system - stuff like that - from the brain to the muscles below your injury," says Mr Straschnitzki. Post-surgery, he has five weeks of intensive physical therapy and a "mapping" process used to enable patients to control their muscles. "Ever since the surgery I've been able to move my legs in certain positions with certain programmes put into the device inside my back, so I'm continuing to work on those muscles and get them stronger to eventually hopefully take assisted walking to the next level and hope stand on my own and do things I wasn't able to do before," he says. Skip Twitter post 2 by @strazsr Exactly a week after Unique Access did the surgery. Heres Ryans progress today. No help. Thats Kitt with phone and Ping “The Mapper” as I call him BTW. Wait for video of Kitt in Ryans sled on ice in a couple weeks. Hes revved to try it. They will “Map” Ryan in his sled for Core. pic.twitter.com/xdHQe7o1Mt — Strazsr (@strazsr) November 11, 2019 Report End of Twitter post 2 by @strazsr Doctors told him after the crash that he had no chance of ever walking or getting "anything back". He says that being in wheelchair you "start to see how not accessible some places are", especially when he travels. But through travel he has met people that "made me realise there's people out there who have it a lot worse than I do who aren't able to do what I do", he says. "I'm very grateful for the way I am today and I kind of use that to motivate myself, thinking it could be a lot worse than it is. I take those thoughts and obviously my teammates who aren't able to do things anymore because they're not here… there's a lot of thoughts that go through my mind but I set goals for myself and surround myself with good support groups." Earlier this year he signed a sponsorship deal with Adidas that has him starring in advertisements for the sportswear giant in Canada. He was also nominated alongside 16 other athletes for Canada's Sports Hall of Fame People's Choice Award. And he recently made province of Alberta's para-ice hockey team and has his eyes set on Team Canada and the winter Paralympics. "I know it's a lofty goal and it could be down the road at some point." he says. "If I don't make it at least I can say that I tried my best and that's all I can do." Related Topics Canada Disability Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Lorry driver charged in fatal Humboldt Broncos ice hockey crash 6 July 2018 Humboldt Broncos: Canada's jersey tribute to crash victims 12 April 2018 Canada crash: Country mourns Humboldt Broncos bus dead 9 April 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US & Canada Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.