https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46517936
India elections: Setback for Modi's BJP in three key states - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India elections: Setback for Modi's BJP in three key states 11 December 2018 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46517936 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Reuters Image caption Congress supporters celebrate initial poll results in Delhi Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his right-wing BJP party appear to be facing a political setback, with major swings against it in three key state elections. The opposition Congress Party looks set to form governments in Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan, while Madhya Pradesh heads for a photo-finish. Correspondents say a win for the depleted Congress in at least two states will see it regain credibility. General elections are due in 2019. Early results in the central state of Madhya Pradesh put the Congress well ahead, but the BJP has been making a late comeback. It is still unclear which of the parties will eventually form the government there. However the opposition, headed by Rahul Gandhi, has a clear lead in Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh, which are former BJP strongholds. Mr Modi, whose brand of Hindu nationalism helped him come to power in 2014, campaigned aggressively in all three states. Should Narendra Modi be worried? Soutik Biswas, BBC News, Delhi Narendra Modi's grandiose promises - especially to create more jobs and increase incomes of farmers - have begun to bite. A lack of jobs and farmer distress will be the crucial issues at next year's national elections, although whether India's farmers will vote as an "angry bloc" against the government is unclear. But the lack of a competitive leader to take on Mr Modi, and the failure to offer an alternative narrative of hope to the people will still make it difficult for the Congress and its allies to mount a credible challenge to Mr Modi. Tuesday's verdict will surely rejuvenate the Congress, but that may not be enough to defeat a formidable ideological adversary like the BJP next year. Read more from Soutik Election results are also being declared for the southern state of Telangana and the north-eastern state of Mizoram. Regional parties - the Telangana Rashtra Samiti (TRS) and the Mizo National Front (MNF) - are headed for a landslide victory in these states. Image copyright BBC Telugu Image caption The regional Telangana Rashtriya Samiti has won a landslide in the southern state The Congress was widely expected to win in the northern state of Rajasthan, while Madhya Pradesh was always seen as a close contest between the two parties. BBC Hindi's Vineet Khare says the Congress may have been overconfident in Madhya Pradesh ahead of the results. "A large banner congratulating senior leader and former minister Kamal Nath was already up at the Congress headquarters yesterday. But now it looks like both parties are still racing to reach the halfway mark they need to win. They might need help from an ally to actually form the government," our correspondent reports from Bhopal. But results in Chhattisgarh, where the Congress appears poised to win by a wide margin, have been the most surprising. "The reason behind the Congress victory is anti-incumbency because people feel that there is a lack of development in most parts of the state despite 15 years of the BJP governing there," reports BBC Hindi's Salman Ravi from the state capital Raipur. "Farmers in particular, who have been angry about what they see as a lack of state support for their profession, voted for the Congress in large numbers. People in the state were clearly looking for change this time." Indian rupee hit by shock resignation, polls Why India's Narendra Modi remains star BJP vote-catcher Is Narendra Modi losing his mojo? Can Rahul Gandhi revive India's Grand Old Party? An anti-incumbency vote against the BJP in the three key states had been predicted, and some analysts point out people vote differently at state and national level. But the results so far suggest a very visible setback for the BJP, which had steadily increased its state footprint since coming to office in 2014. And issues of rural discontent - such as unemployment, lack of development and farming distress - are being seen as issues that could affect ballots next year. BBC Hindi's Nitin Srivastava who is in Rajasthan, has been posting photos of the starkly different atmospheres at the BJP and Congress party offices in the state. Related Topics India Asia Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story India elections: Should Narendra Modi be worried? 12 December 2018 Is Narendra Modi losing his mojo? 19 October 2017 Why India's Narendra Modi remains star BJP vote-catcher 15 May 2018 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.