https://www.bbc.com/news/av/entertainment-arts-35153999/from-street-cat-to-star-of-the-silver-screen
From street cat to star of the silver screen - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts selected Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Video duration 2:54 Street cat Bob to star in movie Jump to media player The story of Bob the cat is set to be told in cinemas in 2016. The ginger stray is the star of the film A Street Cat Named Bob. James Bowen spoke to BBC News 02 Jan 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/entertainment-arts-35153999/from-street-cat-to-star-of-the-silver-screen Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 4:18 Mog's Christmas comeback Jump to media player Author and illustrator Judith Kerr talks about bringing the feline character Mog back for Christmas. 23 Dec 15 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/entertainment-arts-35153997/judith-kerr-mog-s-christmas-comeback Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:14 Could cat videos be a hit in cinemas? Jump to media player The rise of the cat video sensation is being debated at the This Way Up conference. 02 Dec 15 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/uk-34981684/could-cat-videos-be-a-hit-in-cinemas Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:13 Cat video stars get own festival Jump to media player Radio 5 live Breakfast spoke to one of the organisers of the feline film festival in Minneapolis, in the United States. 30 Aug 12 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/entertainment-arts-19423773/feline-stars-celebrated-in-minneapolis-film-festival Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 6:29 How street cat named Bob saved busker Jump to media player Busker-turned-author James Bowen explains how his cat Bob became the most popular author his publisher has ever known. 30 Jun 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/entertainment-arts-23117382/how-street-cat-named-bob-saved-busker Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video From street cat to star of the silver screen The story of Bob the cat hits the cinemas in 2016. The ginger stray will star in A Street Cat Named Bob - the true story of the unlikely friendship between Bob and James Bowen. Bowen first encountered Bob in 2007 when he was living in sheltered accommodation in London. When the cat wandered into the building with an injured leg, Bowen took it to a vet and then nursed it back to health. They have been inseparable ever since. Bowen took Bob busking with him and credits the cat with helping him to come off the methadone programme. Their story is already a bestselling book. Luke Treadaway will star as James Bowen in the film version. BBC News caught up with the duo whilst they were filming in London. 02 Jan 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/entertainment-arts-35153999/from-street-cat-to-star-of-the-silver-screen Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: Mog's Christmas comeback More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts selected Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.