https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47114401
India's BJP tells opposition to 'accept defeat with grace' - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India's BJP tells opposition to 'accept defeat with grace' 22 May 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-47114401 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics India elections 2019 Image copyright Getty Images India's election is nearly over: voting began on 11 April, and the final ballot was cast on 19 May with results out on 23 May. Every day, the BBC will be bringing you all the latest updates on the twists and turns of the world's largest democracy. What happened? The governing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has told opposition parties to accept "defeat with grace" after a slew of exit polls suggested that the ruling party would get a comfortable majority and form the next government. Opposition parties have not only rejected the the exit polls but have also raised concerns of vote fraud. A number of videos, allegedly showing Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) being tampered with, went viral on social media on Tuesday. These prompted several leaders from opposition parties to meet election officials to raise their concerns. They have demanded more transparency in the counting process. But the BJP has rejected their concerns. "EVM is good when Mamata Banerjee became West Bengal chief minister twice and Amarinder Singh became Punjab chief minister. If they win, EVM is good. But when there is expectation that we will win because people of this country want Narendra Modi to be prime minister again, then EVM is unreliable. The BJP condemns their (opposition) conduct and will tell humbly to accept their defeat with grace," Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said. Why does this matter? These allegations have left a bitter taste in the aftermath of the mammoth election in the world's largest democracy, souring what should have been a triumphant achievement for the Election Commission (EC). The bitter war of words between the ruling and opposition parties ahead of counting day on Thursday forced the EC to issue a series of "confidence-building" statements. Opposition parties said the EC was "yet to come out with a mechanism" to deal with a mismatch between an EVM result and the corresponding paper trail. During voting, EVMs are connected to a Voter-Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) machine, which dispenses a slip of paper with the symbol of the party the voter selected. The Supreme Court has ordered the EC to tally the results from five EVMs with VVPAT receipts in at least five polling stations in every assembly seat. A parliamentary constituency comprises several assembly seats. But opposition parties say that the tally should be done for the entire constituency in case of a mismatch. On Tuesday: India poll officials deny 'vote fraud' Image copyright AFP Image caption More than 1.5 million e-voting machines will be used in the summer elections What happened? India's Election Commission has denied allegations that voting machines had been tampered with in parts of India. India's opposition parties are meeting the election watchdog on Tuesday to demand more transparency in counting of votes on 23 May (Thursday). Opposition leaders said the EC had to ensure that there was no possibility of anybody manipulating the Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) which were used to record votes in the general election that concluded on Sunday. In Uttar Pradesh's Ghazipur constituency, a candidate belonging to the opposition Bahujan Samaj Party held a protest outside a room where the machines have been stored ahead of the counting. The candidate alleged that attempts were being made to take out the machines from the storage room. Local officials have said the allegations are baseless. In Chandauli constituency, supporters of Samajwadi Party have circulated a mobile phone clip, alleging that some machines were being brought to the counting station on Monday, a day after the election. Local officials have said the machines shown in the video are reserve machines which had been brought from another part of the constituency because of logistical reasons. The Election Commission has insisted that "proper security and protocol" was maintained in storing the electronic voting machines. Why does this matter? The move comes after a slew of exit polls predicted that the governing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) would get a comfortable majority in parliament to form a government. Sitaram Yechury from the Left Front said the EC was "yet to come out with a mechanism" to deal with a mismatch between an EVM result and the corresponding paper trail. During voting, EVMs are connected to a Voter-Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) machine, which dispenses a slip of paper with the symbol of the party the voter selected. The Supreme Court has ordered the EC to tally the results from five EVMs with VVPAT receipts in at least five polling stations in every assembly seat. A parliamentary constituency comprises several assembly seats. But opposition parties say that the tally should done for the entire constituency in case of a mismatch. "On VVPATs and the EVM tally, the EC is yet to come out with a procedure in case there is a mismatch. Even if there is one mismatch in the EVMs or VVPAT samples picked for counting, to maintain the integrity of the electoral process, all VVPATs in that Assembly segment must be counted. This is important to maintain integrity of the electoral process," Mr Yechury said. If this were to happen however, it would considerably slow down the counting process and declaration of results. PM Modi tweets tribute to former PM Rajiv Gandhi What happened? Prime Minister Narendra Modi has tweeted on the occasion of the death anniversary of former PM Rajiv Gandhi. Mr Modi has repeatedly attacked Mr Gandhi on the campaign trail and his slurs have prompted widespread criticism. He called Mr Gandhi the "number one corrupt man in the country" at a rally earlier this month in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh. A few days later, he went after Mr Gandhi again - accusing him of using a naval aircraft carrier to take him and his family to an island for a "family holiday". Mr Gandhi was assassinated by a suicide bomber in 1991 during a campaign rally. Why does this matter? Mr Modi's tweet marking Mr Gandhi's death anniversary is customary - but it has garnered attention because he attacked the former prime minister repeatedly while campaigning and didn't back down when challenged. Many were taken aback by Mr Modi's criticism of Mr Gandhi. It elicited condemnation not just from the main opposition Congress party, but other regional opposition leaders, political commentators and even former political opponents of Mr Gandhi. Analysts said the comments were a sign of "desperation" and showed that Mr Modi "knew" his party was not going to perform as well as expected in the election. Now that campaigning is over and the election is nearly at an end, Mr Modi seems to be abandoning acerbic rhetoric for something more conciliatory. On Monday, opposition rejects exit poll results Image copyright Getty Images What happened? Opposition leaders have dismissed the exit polls, which suggest that the governing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is on course to win the general election. A slew of exit polls released on Sunday predict big wins for the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA). The highest poll prediction for the NDA is 365 seats, and the lowest is 242. An average of all exit polls gives the NDA 295 seats. Any party or coalition needs at least 272 seats to secure a majority in parliament and form a government. The BJP welcomed the prediction and many of its leaders congratulated party workers' efforts on social media. Why does this matter? Exit polls have to be taken with caution because they have been wrong in the past - a fact that opposition leaders were quick to point out. The BJP is locked in a fierce electoral battle with the Congress and a clutch of regional parties in various states. But the trends suggest that the opposition's strategy may have failed. The most surprising prediction has come from the bellwether state of Uttar Pradesh (UP), which sends 80 MPs to parliament - more than any other. So the state always holds the key to who forms the government - in 2014, the BJP won 71 seats. Analysts had predicted that powerful regional parties would comfortably defeat the BJP this time around. But most of the exit polls suggest the party will perform much better than expected in UP - winning anything between 38 to 68 seats. Only two polls - Nielsen-ABP and NewsX-Neta - have predicted that the BJP would lose at least 40 seats in UP to regional parties. Nielsen-ABP says the NDA will win 22 seats in the state, while NewsX-Neta gives the coalition only 33 seats. These are the the only two polls which predict that the BJP-led alliance could fall short of an outright majority. India votes 2019 Can Rahul Gandhi unseat PM Modi? The ancient epic dominating India's election A really simple guide to India’s general election All our latest election coverage How do you vote in the election? Here's a video explaining everything that happens inside a polling station - and what happens to your vote after that: Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionJourney of a vote Coverage from previous weeks: 13-17 May: The battle for West Bengal heated up and PM Modi held a press conference, but answered no questions. 6-10 May: PM Modi goes after Rajiv Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi apologises to the Supreme Court of India 29 April - 3 May: Snakes on the campaign trail, ex-soldier's candidacy against PM Modi rejected and a row over Rahul Gandhi's citizenship 22-26 April: PM Modi files nomination, no Priyanka Gandhi-Modi contest in Varanasi and Bollywood actor Akshay Kumar interviews Modi 15-19 April: The flying shoe returns, the BJP fields a woman on trial for a blast and a Congress spokesperson jumps ship 8-12 April: India's mammoth election kicks off and veterans try hard to be apolitical, but land in a political controversy 1-5 April: Congress presents manifesto and Facebook does a political purge 25-29 March: The BJP called the Congress' income scheme a "bluff" and Hardik Patel was ruled out from contesting 18-22 March: PM Modi's space address and Congress' ambitious income scheme 11-15 March: From Priyanka Gandhi's debut to a contentious UN vote Ask a question Related Topics Narendra Modi India Rahul Gandhi Asia India elections 2019 Yogi Adityanath Tamil Nadu Priyanka Gandhi Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Rafale deal: Why French jets are at the centre of an Indian political storm 26 September 2018 India Lok Sabha election: 11 things you need to know 10 April 2019 Video India elections: Three reasons why they are important 2 April 2019 Why bribes usually don't buy votes for politicians 22 May 2018 Why a problem of plenty is hurting India's farmers 8 June 2017 Video Lok Sabha elections: What do India's voters want? 11 March 2019 Manohar Parrikar: India PM Modi leads tributes 18 March 2019 India elections: Should Narendra Modi be worried? 12 December 2018 Chandrashekhar Azad: The Indian Dalit leader challenging Modi 20 March 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.