https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-46784315
How emergency powers could be used to build Trump's wall - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US & Canada selected US & Canada US & Canada How emergency powers could be used to build Trump's wall 15 February 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-46784315 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics US government shutdown Media playback is unsupported on your device Media captionFive questions about Trump's border wall US President Donald Trump plans to make use of emergency powers to secure funding for his proposed US-Mexico border wall. Invoking a national emergency could enable Mr Trump to bypass Congress and access military funds and resources. But what are these emergency powers, and is using them that simple? What exactly is a state of emergency? A state of emergency is usually declared in times of national crisis. In this case, Mr Trump has claimed there is a migration crisis on the US-Mexico border. Declaring a national emergency gives the president "access to special powers that are contained in more than 100 other laws", said Elizabeth Goitein, co-director of the Brennan Center's Liberty and National Security Program. Those powers effectively allow the president to bypass the usual political process. "Obviously, the intent is to provide for badly needed flexibility when there are urgent crises which Congress does not have time to address," Ms Goitein said. Is there really a border emergency? More than 2,000 people were turned away or arrested at the border each day during November 2018. Supporters of Mr Trump's plans for a wall have said the numbers constitute an emergency. Others argue the migration across the southern border is far lower than a decade ago, and many of the thousands of people who travelled north from countries like Honduras are presenting themselves as asylum seekers, looking to enter the country legally. 6 things that could topple Donald Trump's border wall How much of Trump's wall has been built? Ms Goitein, an expert on presidential emergency powers, said she did not believe the situation constituted a national emergency. "It needs to be something fast-moving, totally unforeseen, it is meant to be a stopgap measure," she said. "This is not such a thing and it would be a tremendous abuse of power to invoke just to short-circuit the political process." Ms Goitein pointed to two sections of the law which Mr Trump could take advantage of. One would allow the redirection of funds for military projects already approved by Congress, the other would require the administration to prove the wall amounts to a military construction. Neither are a "slam dunk" for the president, who must cite one of the laws as the legal basis for his declaration, Ms Goitein said. Can Congress block a national emergency? The National Emergencies Act contains a clause that allows Congress to terminate the emergency status - provided both houses agree and the president does not veto. With a comfortable majority in the House, Democrats could pass such a resolution to the Senate. The Republicans control the Senate, but a number of Republican senators have been vocal in their unease about the president invoking a national emergency. The dissenting Republicans include 2012 presidential candidate and new senator for Utah Mitt Romney, the Florida senator Marco Rubio, and the senator from Alaska Lisa Murkowski, who said the move was "of dubious constitutionality". The resolution would however still require Mr Trump's signature to pass, allowing him to veto it. A supermajority in both houses of Congress is needed to overturn a presidential veto. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Harry Truman, pictured in 1953, tried - unsuccessfully - to use the powers There is another option of blocking the move through the courts - which is what happened when President Harry Truman tried to nationalise the steel industry during the Korean War, setting a legal precedent. "If Harry Truman couldn't nationalise the steel industry during wartime, this president doesn't have the power to declare an emergency and build a multibillion-dollar wall on the border," Adam Schiff, the House intelligence committee chairman, told CNN. How frequently do presidents use the emergency act? Mr Trump's predecessor, Barack Obama, used it 13 times, while his predecessor George W Bush used it 12 times. If Mr Trump goes ahead with declaring a national emergency, it would be the fourth of his administration. But emergency declarations by previous presidents have been overwhelmingly used for addressing foreign policy crises - including blocking terrorism-linked entities from accessing funds or prohibiting investment in nations associated with human rights abuses. "It's extremely rare for a president to declare a national emergency in a bid to fund domestic construction projects, particularly one that Congress has explicitly refused to fund," Andrew Boyle, an attorney in the national security program at the Brennan Center for Justice, told the Associated Press news agency. "The ones that former presidents declared are of a different sort." Mr Trump's decision to apply the powers to overcome a partisan impasse over border security has struck politicians on both sides of the aisle as a deviation from the intended use of the act. "It would be a pretty dramatic expansion of how this was used in the past," said the Republican senator Ron Johnson. Some previous uses were for issues like the H1N1 influenza epidemic and have since ended. Others are more general and continue to this day, like blocking the property of people "engaging in significant malicious cyber-enabled activities". Perhaps the most well-known occasion a president used his powers was in the case of Franklin D Roosevelt, who used them to order the internment of more than 110,000 Japanese-Americans in the months after the 1941 attack on Pearl Harbour. George W Bush used emergency powers in the wake of the 11 September 2001 World Trade Centre attack to sign off wiretapping and interrogation methods later decried as torture. The National Emergencies Act is not used to respond natural disasters. Related Topics US government shutdown Mexico–US border US immigration Donald Trump Donald Trump's border wall Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story #ShutdownStories: The impact of the government shutdown 24 January 2019 Is there a crisis on the US-Mexico border? 11 July 2019 Trump threatens 'national emergency' over wall 5 January 2019 US budget shutdown: I won't compromise on wall, says Trump 6 January 2019 Video US government shutdown: Five questions about Trump's wall 4 January 2019 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US & Canada Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.