https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-scotland-scotland-business-50410782
General election 2019: What would Labour's NHS pledges mean for Scotland? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK selected Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Scotland selected Scotland Politics Scotland Business selected Edinburgh, Fife & East Glasgow & West Highlands & Islands NE, Orkney & Shetland South Tayside & Central Scotland business Scotland business General election 2019: What would Labour's NHS pledges mean for Scotland? Douglas Fraser Business/economy editor, Scotland 13 November 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-scotland-scotland-business-50410782 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Jeremy Corbyn has said a Labour government would outspend the Conservatives on the NHS in England While Jeremy Corbyn has been campaigning in Scotland on Wednesday, his colleagues have been setting out health service plans in London. Conservatives have already committed to a significant uplift in spending. Labour say they'll top that, by £6bn per year by 2023-24. That includes pledges on hospital upgrades, a lot more for mental health, nurse training bursaries and free prescriptions. And it comes with attacks on Tories for the waiting times in the English NHS. So what does that mean for NHS Scotland? More money, almost certainly. For every uplift in the NHS budget south of the Border, a portion is added to the block grant heading to Holyrood. But it won't be added in full, because MSPs now control the levers on income tax, and the Treasury block grant is adjusted (downwards) to take account of that. Labour at Westminster says it will pay for higher spending with higher tax on higher earners. The latest from the general election campaign Labour vows to outspend Tories on the NHS That could make it politically easier for the SNP administration to raise tax levels in Scotland to match Corbyn levels. Or MSPs could reverse the current position, and make the Scottish income tax system more attractive for higher earners. Adding to the block grant doesn't mean the money will be spent on the NHS in Scotland, but it tends to be spent there, because of similar political pressure on Scottish parties. Several of Labour's commitments look like policies already in place in Scotland, including free prescriptions, reducing the role of the private sector, and 'free care' for older people. That could leave more money to spend on the parts of NHS Scotland that are creaking most loudly; Accident and Emergency waiting times, social care for those discharged from hospital, and recruitment gaps, including family doctors. Conservatives are attacking Labour for wanting to move NHS workers to a four-day week. Tories say that would cost a very large amount extra. Labour responds that aspiration could take 10 years, and could be partly funded by productivity gains. Either way, it could have a significant knock-on effect in Scotland, if NHS pay and conditions are shaped by a pay review body at a UK level, and its report is then adapted and negotiated at a Scottish level. Related Topics Jeremy Corbyn NHS Scotland NHS Labour Party Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Scotland Sections Scotland Scotland Politics Scotland Business selected Edinburgh, Fife & East Glasgow & West Highlands & Islands NE, Orkney & Shetland South Tayside & Central Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK selected UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland selected Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.