https://www.bbc.com/news/av/magazine-22315685/180-degree-television-for-the-home
180 degree television for the home? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Video duration 4:42 180 degree television for the home? Jump to media player BBC News takes a look at a new filming and projection technique which aims to create an enhanced, immersive experience, augmenting traditional screen viewing. 03 May 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/magazine-22315685/180-degree-television-for-the-home Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Chair 'grows like popcorn' Jump to media player Belgian designer Carl de Smet discusses his experiments with smart foam technology, which allows him to 'bake' furniture so it assembles itself. 05 Apr 13 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-22015184/self-assembling-furniture-grows-like-popcorn Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Today's kids try the Commodore 64 Jump to media player BBC News has conducted an experiment to see what pupils of today make of the Commodore 64 home computer, as it celebrates its 30th anniversary. 01 Aug 12 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-19055707/commodore-64-turns-30-what-do-today-s-kids-make-of-it Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video 180 degree television for the home? A new kind of immersive video experience compatible with standard television screens and projectors is being unveiled at the British Film Institute on Sunday, as part of the Sci-Fi London Festival. Described as a kind of visual equivalent of "surround sound", it has been developed by BBC Research & Development, who used the technology for the animation film Kill Mode, which is being premiered. Alia Sheikh, director of BBC R&D Production Labs, explained how the technology works. Immersive video is a concept that technology companies have experimented with, finding varying levels of success. Philips pushed the idea in 2004 with its Ambilight television sets, which projected light around the television, to suit the mood of the content being played. But the innovation was of limited appeal to the public. Microsoft has confirmed it is working on a form of immersive video for gaming, which it calls IllumiRoom - it uses the Kinect camera and a projector to extend graphics beyond the television screen - but there yet is no clear indication of when it might go on sale. Since 2006 BBC Research & Development has been working on its own version of immersive video, using its own room calibration software, and a reverse projection technique that works with standard projectors. Combining a standard camera view, with a second wider view, filmed with a "fish eye" lens, it has been used to film a short live action film called Broken, as well as the Kill Mode animation. Video journalist: Dougal Shaw Up Next is a new series of video features for the BBC News website which examines the new developments that could affect all of our lives in the future. Kill Mode was produced by Alia Sheikh for the BBC R&D Surround Video system, directed by Lilah Vandenburgh, CG & Artwork by Paul Duffield, with voice acting by Toby Manley. 03 May 2013 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/magazine-22315685/180-degree-television-for-the-home Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: Chair 'grows like popcorn' More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.