https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46639060
India election 2019: Is India building enough new houses? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India election 2019: Is India building enough new houses? By Saroj Singh BBC Reality Check 22 March 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46639060 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Related Topics Reality Check Pledge: The current government has promised that every Indian will have a home to live in by 2022 - with 10 million homes ready by this year in rural areas and 10 million ready by 2022 in urban areas. Verdict: Millions of new homes have been planned and approved to deal with India's chronic homelessness problem. But so far, not nearly as many have actually been completed as the government claims. The BJP government is, however, building new homes at a faster rate than the previous Congress-led government. In the run-up to the Indian election, which gets under way on 11 April, BBC Reality Check is examining claims and pledges made by the main political parties. In 2015, Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched a scheme to tackle homelessness, and, in February 2018, he said: "We will achieve our target of housing for all by 2022." The last official estimate for India's homeless was 1.77 million, out of a total national population of 1.2 billion, in the census data from 2011. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Many new homes are being built around India's largest cities Those who work to help the homeless believe the actual total is a significantly higher. In Mumbai, India's most populous city, local non-governmental organisations estimate the number of homeless people is up to five times the official figure of around 60,000. So it is difficult to know exactly how many homes would be needed to ensure that everyone is actually housed. However, it is important to add that this scheme is aimed at helping not only those families who have no shelter at all, but also those living in very basic or sub-standard housing. The current scheme offers subsidies of up to 130,000 rupees ($1,856, £1,411) per house for those lower income groups which qualify. The aim is to enable families to buy or build a home of reasonable quality with proper facilities like toilets, electricity and gas connections for cooking. How many urban houses have been built? In July 2018, Mr Modi said that 5.4 million homes out of the scheme target of 10 million had been approved for building in urban areas. Official data from the Ministry of Housing shows that by March 2019, 8 million homes had been approved. That is more than were approved under similar schemes run by previous governments between 2004 and 2014. Having said that, only 1.8 million had been finished by March this year. Housebuilding in India Government-funded scheme Source: Housing and Rural Development ministries And it is worth mentioning that it takes more than a year for a house to get approval on paper - and several more years to get it constructed and then occupied. A report by the credit rating agency Crisil, published at the end of 2018, estimated that the government would need to spend a total of 1,500bn rupees ($21.8bn) to achieve its housing goals in urban areas by 2022. It said that the government had spent less than a quarter of this amount so far. Experts believe there are a number of issues holding back plans for lower-income housing: lack of use of newer technology land scarcity in urban areas high land prices issues around property and land holding records Image copyright Reuters Dr Renu Khosla, director of the Centre for Urban and Rural Excellence, believes the land issue is key. "In the absence of land in the heart of the city, you are forced to build in the outlying areas," she says. "But people don't want to move to those places, because they lack transportation and jobs." Read more from Reality Check When will broadband reach all villages in India? Are three times more roads being built in India? Will India's bullet train run on time? Will India become the next manufacturing superpower? Rural building is better Under the rural homebuilding scheme, 10 million houses were intended for construction over a period of three years from 2016 to 2019. In July last year, Mr Modi claimed that 10 million houses had actually been handed over to families in rural areas. But that is not correct, at least not according to the official data. This shows that since the scheme launched in 2015, the total number of houses now built in rural areas stands at just over 7 million - not yet on target. But overall, the current government has improved on the performance of the previous Congress-led government from 2009 to 2014, which had its own rural housing scheme. Rural houses built annually In millions New building scheme starts in 2016 Source: Ministry of Rural Development An official Indian audit report in 2014 said that the annual rate of construction for the five years under the Congress-led government was 1.65 million homes. But under the current BJP government that figure had improved to 1.86 million houses a year for the period from 2016 to 2018. Read more from Reality Check Send us your questions Follow us on Twitter Related Topics Reality Check India India elections 2019 Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Behind India's construction boom: 'We risk our lives to build your homes' 7 January 2019 Why are more than 10 million homes vacant in India? 21 May 2015 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.