https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-europe-29758791/i-ignore-the-trolls
100 Women: Conchita Wurst meets Kate Smurthwaite - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say World selected Africa Asia Australia Europe selected Latin America Middle East Video duration 3:08 Conchita Wurst: 'I ignore the trolls' Jump to media player Austrian Eurovision winner Conchita Wurst talks to comedian Kate Smurthwaite about dealing with Twitter trolls, cross-dressing and why she doesn't want to be seen as a role model. 26 Oct 14 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-europe-29758791/100-women-conchita-wurst-meets-kate-smurthwaite Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:38 Do we need to talk about sexism? Jump to media player Sexual harassment, assault and rape remain huge problems for women around the world, despite a narrowing gender gap and growing equality. What can be done? 27 Oct 14 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-29763582/100-women-do-we-need-to-talk-about-sexism Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 1:44 'Iraq's violence took my men away' Jump to media player The story of Umm Ahmed, an Iraqi woman whose son, husband and brothers-in-law vanished overnight. 26 Oct 14 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-middle-east-29723347/100-women-2014-iraq-violence-took-my-men Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 1:33 Bolivia TV chef: 'Shout about abuse' Jump to media player Justa Canaviri is Bolivia's top celebrity chef and one of the country's best-known traditionally dressed "cholitas". Born in La Paz in 1963, she speaks to the BBC for 100 Women. 26 Oct 14 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-latin-america-29758798/100-women-bolivia-cholita-chef-justa-canaviri-on-abuse Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video 100 Women: Conchita Wurst meets Kate Smurthwaite Bearded drag queen Conchita Wurst won the Eurovision Song Contest for Austria in May 2014. For the BBC's 100 Women season, she told British comedian Kate Smurthwaite about dealing with Twitter trolls, cross-dressing and why she doesn't want to be seen as a role model. She told Ms Smurthwaite: "Every drag queen has a similar story when it comes to straight men. Especially those who have had a couple too many drinks." The singer, whose real name is Tom Neuwirth, added: "I don't say every gay man should wear a beard and a wig. But I do it because I love it." The BBC's 100 Women season runs online, on BBC World News TV and on BBC World Service radio from 27-29 October. 26 Oct 2014 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-europe-29758791/100-women-conchita-wurst-meets-kate-smurthwaite Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: Do we need to talk about sexism? More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation World Sections Africa Asia Australia Europe selected Latin America Middle East Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe selected Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.