https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46286284
Cyclone Gaja: India girl segregated during period dies - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Cyclone Gaja: India girl segregated during period dies 21 November 2018 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46286284 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Reuters Image caption Cyclone Gaja has killed at least 46 people so far in the coastal state Villagers in India's southern state of Tamil Nadu are grieving the death of a 14-year-old girl who died in a cyclone after being forced to sleep separately because she was menstruating. Her family told BBC Tamil that she was trapped in the hut on 16 November when the cyclone made landfall. Some villagers said this was a "wake up call" as it was common practice to segregate menstruating girls. Cyclone Gaja is known to have killed at least 46 people in the coastal state. Menstruation is taboo in large parts of rural India. Women are traditionally believed to be impure during their periods. The family of the girl, S Vijayalakshmi, lives in a house next to the hut but they survived the storm. Her grandmother, S Visalakshi, said they couldn't rescue her as a coconut tree had fallen on the hut, which made it impossible to reach her. Image copyright Reuters Image caption The storm has uprooted thousands of trees She said Vijayalakshmi's parents had known that the storm was approaching but they couldn't keep her anywhere else since they lived in a coconut grove, far from the rest of the village, known as Anaikudi. "I told them to take her to a different place. But within hours, the cyclone had struck and we couldn't move anywhere," she said. "We are shattered," she told BBC Tamil's Pramila Krishnan. "When we saw the tree, we lost hope. We waited for villagers to help us remove the tree and pull her out of the hut." Counting the cost of Chennai floods 'When I have my period, I can't touch anyone else' Banished for bleeding 'Why I fought having my periods in a mud hut' She added that they had rushed her to the hospital but doctors said that she had died hours ago and declared her dead on arrival. Veerasena, a local social activist, said both rich and poor families followed the tradition of forcing girls to sleep separately while they were menstruating. Image caption The storm destroyed more than 80,000 hectares of farm land Powerful winds uprooted trees and the storm destroyed more than 80,000 hectares of farm land across 12 different districts, according to official estimates. Fishing and cash crops, such as coconuts and tamarind, are a major source of livelihood in the region and both have been severely affected; fishing boats have been wrecked and many homes in costal villages have been flooded with sea water. Why are Indian women 'Happy to Bleed'? India girl kills herself over 'menstruation shaming' India school's 'menstruation check' investigated There have been protests by villagers in some of the districts, alleging that the government has not been providing them with basic staples such as food and water. A statement by local officials claims that sufficient water, food and blankets have been provided in all the 493 relief camps set up by them. Related Topics Periods India Chennai Asia Hurricanes Tamil Nadu Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Nepal criminalises banishing menstruating women to huts 10 August 2017 Nepal police investigate death of girl banished for menstruating 20 December 2016 The lost fishermen of India's Cyclone Ockhi 11 December 2017 Video Counting the cost of Chennai floods 18 December 2015 100 Women 2014: The taboo of menstruating in India 27 October 2014 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.