https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-40897522
Article 35A: Why a special law on Kashmir is controversial - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India Article 35A: Why a special law on Kashmir is controversial 5 August 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-40897522 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Kashmiris fear that a change in the law will affect the state's demographics - currently it's the only Muslim-majority state in India Tensions are high in Indian-administered Kashmir amid speculation that a law which grants the state's residents unique privileges including property rights could be revoked. Top leaders have been put under house arrest, public meetings have been banned and reports say mobile networks and the internet have been restricted. Article 35A, as it is known, has always been a source of contention between the Muslim-majority valley and the right-wing Hindu BJP party that now governs India. The party has long vowed to revoke the law, which many see as a core aspect of the special status the Indian constitution gives Kashmir. This provision, known as Article 370, allows the state its own constitution, a separate flag and independence over all matters except foreign affairs, defence and communications. What does Article 35A say? Article 35A of the constitution allows the legislature of Indian-administered Kashmir to define the state's "permanent residents" and what distinguishes them. It applies to all of Indian-administered Kashmir, including Jammu and Ladakh. All identified residents are issued a permanent resident certificate, which entitles them to special benefits related to employment, scholarships and other privileges. But the biggest advantage for permanent residents is that only they have the right to own and, therefore, buy, property in the state. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Protests, shutdowns and violent clashes between civilians and Indian security forces are common in Srinagar, the capital of Indian-administered Kashmir Who does it cover? All those who were living in the state as of 14 May 1954, when the law came into effect; and those who have lived in the state for 10 years anytime since, are counted as permanent residents. The state legislature can also alter the definition of a permanent resident or other aspects of the law by a two-thirds majority. How did it come about? The Maharaja of Kashmir, Hari Singh, first passed the law in 1927 to stop the influx of people from the northern state of Punjab into the state. Reports say he did this on the urging of powerful Kashmiri Hindus. The law still exists in parts of Pakistan-administered Kashmir. Is India losing Kashmir? The election where no one came to vote The "studious" 12-year-old victim of India's Kashmir problem Kashmir profile In India, the law in its current form was introduced in 1954. It's part of Article 370, the constitutional provision that grants Kashmir special status within India. When the Jammu and Kashmir constitution was adopted in 1956, it ratified the then two-year-old permanent resident law. What is its significance? It protects the state's distinct demographic character. Since Indian-administered Kashmir is the only Muslim-majority state in India, many Kashmiris suspect Hindu nationalist groups of encouraging Hindus to migrate to the state. This doesn't sit well with Kashmiris given their tumultuous relationship with India - there has been an armed revolt in the region against Indian rule since 1989. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Kashmiris have been revolting against Indian rule since 1989 India blames Pakistan for fuelling the unrest, a charge Islamabad denies. Both countries claim Kashmir in its entirety but only control parts of it. Since India's partition and the creation of Pakistan in 1947, the nuclear-armed neighbours have fought two wars and a limited conflict over the territory. What do those who defend the law say? They say abolishing the law would dishonour the Indian government's promise to protect Kashmir's special status. They also fear that it would open up the state for outsiders to settle, eventually changing its demographics. Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti has warned that changing the law would further alienate Kashmiris Former chief minister Omar Abdullah tweeted that removing the law would have "grave consequences" for Jammu and Ladakh. Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti has warned that it would destroy India's fragile relationship with the state. Senior journalist Shujaat Bukhari contributed to this story in 2017. He was killed in Srinagar on 14 June 2018. Related Topics Kashmir India Asia Pakistan Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn More on this story Kashmir leaders under house arrest as unrest grows 5 August 2019 Is India losing Kashmir? 26 April 2017 Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.