https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-china-38914607/think-your-commute-is-bad-think-again
Think your commute is bad? Think again. - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China selected India Video duration 1:16 Think your commute is bad? Jump to media player Villagers in Sichuan, China, have a new ladder to assist their 800-metre climb to the outside world. 09 Feb 17 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-china-38914607/think-your-commute-is-bad-think-again Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:42 The men of China's 'bachelor village' Jump to media player Xiong Jigen, 43, is one of many men inside China's remote "bachelor village", where bad roads and a skewed gender imbalance has made it difficult to find a wife. 29 Aug 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-china-37195502/the-man-inside-china-s-lonely-bachelor-village Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video Think your commute is bad? Think again. Villagers in Sichuan, China, have a new ladder to assist their 800-metre climb to the outside world. 09 Feb 2017 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-asia-china-38914607/think-your-commute-is-bad-think-again Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: The men of China's 'bachelor village' More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China selected India Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.