https://www.bbc.com/reel/video/p075wk3s/the-hidden-impacts-of-air-pollution
The hidden impacts of air pollution - BBC Reel Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. PlaylistsHome The hidden impacts of air pollution 09 April 2019 |Environment BBC Reel Playlist 10 videos 25:44 Healthy Living Dynamic stories and ideas that revel in a mixture of healthy foods and exercise to inspire a healthier lifestyle. NOW WATCHING Environment Is the air we breathe dangerous? How air pollution is doing more than killing us. Now Playing NEXT UPAge Three steps to live to 100 When asked about the secrets to their long lives, residents of the Nicoya peninsula mention three key points. Watch now Health 'Too much water almost killed me' Marathon runner Johanna Pakenham was rushed to the hospital after drinking five litres of water. Watch now Health Are USA citizens living shorter lives? Nobel Prize-winning economist Sir Angus Deaton says these "deaths of despair" are driven by inequality. Watch now Work Why young Swedes are burning out More young Swedes are exhausted from work and life pressures Watch now Health It's not actually the chlorine Do your eyes ever feel red and sore after swimming in an indoor pool? Watch now Health What’s behind the ‘black food’ craze? Does activated charcoal have genuine health benefits, or is it just another Instagram-friendly food myth? Watch now The gym made out of melted knives Can London's new outdoor gym change attitudes to knife crime? Watch now Sport The true origin of snowboarding Meet the 'father of snowboarding' Jake Burton. Watch now Sport Man V Fat This football team of men are trying to improve their fitness. Watch now Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.