https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-48366944
India general election 2019: What happened? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World selected US & Canada UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Asia selected China India selected India India India general election 2019: What happened? By Becky Dale and Christine Jeavans Data Journalists, BBC News 24 May 2019 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-48366944 Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Results for India's general election released on 23 May saw a landslide victory for the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), which increased its huge parliamentary majority. The margins of victory Narendra Modi and his ruling BJP have swept back to power. The party won 303 seats in the Lok Sabha, the lower house of India's parliament, bettering the 282 seats they won in 2014 - a performance that not many thought was possible. A party needs to win 272 seats for a majority in parliament. The BJP's victory in 2014 was the first time in three decades that a party had been able to win that number of seats on its own. Rahul Gandhi's opposition Indian National Congress (INC) and its allies, who only won 54 seats the last time, put up a stronger fight this time but were unable to make any meaningful gains. Women voters made their voices heard Nearly half of India's 900 million registered voters are women. Since independence, female voters have increasingly turned out to vote in greater numbers. But 2019 marked the first time that female voter turnout equalled male voter turnout. This was the best year for female candidates This election saw not only the largest number of female candidates stand for election, the number of women who actually won was also the highest ever. But men still dominate national politics Women have historically comprised a mere fraction of the candidates in India's general election, and 2019 was no different. Only 723 of the 8,000 candidates were female. That's less than one in 10. The seven national parties actually fielded about the same number of candidates in 2019 as they did in 2014, which was not offset by a concerted BJP effort to improve gender parity. Related Topics India Share this story About sharing Email Facebook Messenger Messenger Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp LinkedIn Top Stories Police surround HK campus after night of violence After a fiery overnight stand-off, some protesters tried to leave - but were met with tear gas. 18 November 2019 Police tear gas met with petrol bombs 17 November 2019 'They had shot the boys in the head' 17 November 2019 Features Video Children trying to spell tricky Spanish words 'My mother fled Germany, now I'm being denied citizenship' How the Irish sport of hurling came to the US Video Helping coal miners to save the planet Why Ukraine is so important to the US Ever tried revenge honey? It tastes good How Boris Johnson rose to power The great train safari from Tanzania to Zambia Video 'I'm Hispanic but can't speak Spanish' Elsewhere on the BBC Football phrases 15 sayings from around the world Full article Football phrases Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation Asia Sections Asia China India selected Home Video World selected World Home Africa Asia selected Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say BBC News Services On your mobile On your connected tv Get news alerts Contact BBC News Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.