https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36841734/what-do-republican-delegates-fear
What do Republican delegates fear? - BBC News Homepage Accessibility links Skip to content Accessibility Help BBC Account Notifications Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Menu Search Search the BBCSearch the BBC News BBC News Navigation Sections Home Video World US & Canada selected UK Business Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say US Election 2016 selected Results States A-Z Video duration 2:04 What do Republican delegates fear? Jump to media player Delegates at the Republican convention discuss whether they're fearful or hopeful for America's future. 20 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36841734/what-do-republican-delegates-fear Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:02 A black Republican on race and his party Jump to media player Clarence Mingo is African-American and a Republican delegate from Ohio. Donald Trump has polled at 0% among black voters in his home state. 20 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36839494/a-black-republican-on-race-and-his-own-party Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 1:33 What Republicans thought of Melania's speech Jump to media player Melania Trump's speech grabbed headlines for plagiarising portions of Michelle Obama's 2008 speech. But what did Republicans at the convention think of it? 20 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36828115/what-republicans-thought-of-melania-trump-s-speech Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Video duration 2:38 A tale of two Republican delegates Jump to media player The BBC speaks to two first-time delegates, who are divided on whether Trump can take their party all the way to the White House. 19 Jul 16 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36831390/a-tale-of-two-republican-delegates Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Previous Next Now Playing Up Next Media player Media playback is unsupported on your device Video What do Republican delegates fear? Many speeches at the Republican convention have focused on the dangers America faces. But what makes rank-and-file republican delegates fearful (or hopeful)? The BBC's Jasmine Taylor-Coleman reports. Filmed by: Anna Bressanin 20 Jul 2016 Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share this with Facebook Share this with WhatsApp Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share Share this with These are external links and will open in a new window Email Share this with Email Facebook Share this with Facebook Messenger Share this with Messenger Messenger Share this with Messenger Twitter Share this with Twitter Pinterest Share this with Pinterest WhatsApp Share this with WhatsApp LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn Copy this link https://www.bbc.com/news/av/election-us-2016-36841734/what-do-republican-delegates-fear Read more about sharing. These are external links and will open in a new window Close share panel Go to next video: A black Republican on race and his party More On: Loading... Video Top Stories More from BBC Reel Must See Most watched Why you can trust BBC News BBC News Navigation US Election 2016 Sections US Election 2016 Results States A-Z Home Video World World Home Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada selected US & Canada Home UK UK Home England N. Ireland Scotland Wales Election 2019 Business Business Home Market Data Global Trade Companies Entrepreneurship Technology of Business Connected World Global Education Economy Tech Science Stories Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures Reality Check World News TV Newsbeat Special Reports Explainers The Reporters Have Your Say Explore the BBC Home News Sport Weather iPlayer Sounds CBBC CBeebies Food Bitesize Arts Taster Local TV Radio Three Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised NewslettersCopyright © 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.